An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations by Adam Smith is a publication of The
Electronic Classics Series. This Portable Document file is furnished free and without any charge of any
kind. Any person using this document file, for any purpose, and in any way does so at his or her own
risk. Neither the Pennsylvania State University nor Jim Manis, Editor, nor anyone associated with the
Pennsylvania State University assumes any responsibility for the material contained within the document
or for the file as an electronic transmission, in any way.
An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations by Adam Smith, The Electronic Classics
Series, Jim Manis, Editor, PSU-Hazleton, Hazleton, PA 18202 is a Portable Document File produced as
part of an ongoing publication project to bring classical works of literature, in English, to free and easy
access of those wishing to make use of them.
Jim Manis is a faculty member of the English Department of The Pennsylvania State University. This page
and any preceding page(s) are restricted by copyright. The text of the following pages are not copyrighted
within the United States; however, the fonts used may be.
Cover Design: Jim Manis
Copyright © 2005
The Pennsylvania State University is an equal opportunity university.
I have endeavoured, in the fourth book, to explain as fully and distinctly as I can those different theories, and the principal effects

OF THE CAUSES OF IMPROVEMENT IN
THE PRODUCTIVE POWERS OF
L ABOUR, AND OF THE ORDER ACCORDING TO WHICH ITS PRODUCE IS
NATURALLY DISTRIBUTED AMONG
THE DIFFERENT RANKS OF THE
PEOPLE.

which they have produced in different ages and nations.
To explain in what has consisted the revenue of the great body
of the people, or what has been the nature of those funds, which,
in different ages and nations, have supplied their annual consumption, is the object of these four first books. The fifth and last book
treats of the revenue of the sovereign, or commonwealth. In this
book I have endeavoured to shew, first, what are the necessary
expenses of the sovereign, or commonwealth; which of those ex-

CHAPTER I

penses ought to be defrayed by the general contribution of the
whole society, and which of them, by that of some particular part

OF THE DIVISION OF LABOUR

only, or of some particular members of it: secondly, what are the
different methods in which the whole society may be made to

T

HE GREATEST IMPROVEMENTS in the productive powers of

labour, and the greater part of the skill, dexterity, and
judgment, with which it is anywhere directed, or ap-

contribute towards defraying the expenses incumbent on the whole
society, and what are the principal advantages and inconvenien-

plied, seem to have been the effects of the division of labour. The
effects of the division of labour, in the general business of society,

cies of each of those methods; and, thirdly and lastly, what are the
reasons and causes which have induced almost all modern govern-

will be more easily understood, by considering in what manner it
operates in some particular manufactures. It is commonly sup-

ments to mortgage some part of this revenue, or to contract debts;
and what have been the effects of those debts upon the real wealth,

posed to be carried furthest in some very trifling ones; not perhaps that it really is carried further in them than in others of more

the annual produce of the land and labour of the society.

10

Adam Smith
importance: but in those trifling manufactures which are destined
to supply the small wants of but a small number of people, the

But in the way in which this business is now carried on, not only
the whole work is a peculiar trade, but it is divided into a number

whole number of workmen must necessarily be small; and those
employed in every different branch of the work can often be col-

of branches, of which the greater part are likewise peculiar trades.
One man draws out the wire; another straights it; a third cuts it; a

lected into the same workhouse, and placed at once under the
view of the spectator.

fourth points it; a fifth grinds it at the top for receiving the head;
to make the head requires two or three distinct operations; to put

In those great manufactures, on the contrary, which are destined to supply the great wants of the great body of the people,

it on is a peculiar business; to whiten the pins is another; it is even
a trade by itself to put them into the paper; and the important

every different branch of the work employs so great a number of
workmen, that it is impossible to collect them all into the same

business of making a pin is, in this manner, divided into about
eighteen distinct operations, which, in some manufactories, are

workhouse. We can seldom see more, at one time, than those
employed in one single branch. Though in such manufactures,

all performed by distinct hands, though in others the same man
will sometimes perform two or three of them. I have seen a small

therefore, the work may really be divided into a much greater number of parts, than in those of a more trifling nature, the division is

manufactory of this kind, where ten men only were employed,
and where some of them consequently performed two or three

not near so obvious, and has accordingly been much less observed.
To take an example, therefore, from a very trifling manufacture,

distinct operations. But though they were very poor, and therefore but indifferently accommodated with the necessary machin-

but one in which the division of labour has been very often taken
notice of, the trade of a pin-maker: a workman not educated to

ery, they could, when they exerted themselves, make among them
about twelve pounds of pins in a day. There are in a pound up-

this business (which the division of labour has rendered a distinct
trade, nor acquainted with the use of the machinery employed in

wards of four thousand pins of a middling size. Those ten persons, therefore, could make among them upwards of forty-eight

it (to the invention of which the same division of labour has probably given occasion), could scarce, perhaps, with his utmost in-

thousand pins in a day. Each person, therefore, making a tenth
part of forty-eight thousand pins, might be considered as making

dustry, make one pin in a day, and certainly could not make twenty.

four thousand eight hundred pins in a day. But if they had all

11

The Wealth of Nations
wrought separately and independently, and without any of them
having been educated to this peculiar business, they certainly could

ferent trades are employed in each branch of the linen and woollen
manufactures, from the growers of the flax and the wool, to the

not each of them have made twenty, perhaps not one pin in a day;
that is, certainly, not the two hundred and fortieth, perhaps not

bleachers and smoothers of the linen, or to the dyers and dressers
of the cloth! The nature of agriculture, indeed, does not admit of

the four thousand eight hundredth, part of what they are at present
capable of performing, in consequence of a proper division and

so many subdivisions of labour, nor of so complete a separation of
one business from another, as manufactures. It is impossible to

combination of their different operations.
In every other art and manufacture, the effects of the division of

separate so entirely the business of the grazier from that of the
corn-farmer, as the trade of the carpenter is commonly separated

labour are similar to what they are in this very trifling one, though,
in many of them, the labour can neither be so much subdivided,

from that of the smith. The spinner is almost always a distinct
person from the, weaver; but the ploughman, the harrower, the

nor reduced to so great a simplicity of operation. The division of
labour, however, so far as it can be introduced, occasions, in every

sower of the seed, and the reaper of the corn, are often the same.
The occasions for those different sorts of labour returning with

art, a proportionable increase of the productive powers of labour.
The separation of different trades and employments from one

the different seasons of the year, it is impossible that one man
should be constantly employed in any one of them. This impossi-

another, seems to have taken place in consequence of this advantage. This separation, too, is generally carried furthest in those

bility of making so complete and entire a separation of all the
different branches of labour employed in agriculture, is perhaps

countries which enjoy the highest degree of industry and improvement; what is the work of one man, in a rude state of society,

the reason why the improvement of the productive powers of
labour, in this art, does not always keep pace with their improve-

being generally that of several in an improved one. In every improved society, the farmer is generally nothing but a farmer; the

ment in manufactures. The most opulent nations, indeed, generally excel all their neighbours in agriculture as well as in manufac-

manufacturer, nothing but a manufacturer. The labour, too, which
is necessary to produce any one complete manufacture, is almost

tures; but they are commonly more distinguished by their superiority in the latter than in the former. Their lands are in general

always divided among a great number of hands. How many dif-

better cultivated, and having more labour and expense bestowed

12

Adam Smith
upon them, produce more in proportion to the extent and natural
fertility of the ground. But this superiority of produce is seldom

high duties upon the importation of raw silk, does not so well suit
the climate of England as that of France. But the hardware and

much more than in proportion to the superiority of labour and
expense. In agriculture, the labour of the rich country is not al-

the coarse woollens of England are beyond all comparison superior to those of France, and much cheaper, too, in the same degree

ways much more productive than that of the poor; or, at least, it is
never so much more productive, as it commonly is in manufac-

of goodness. In Poland there are said to be scarce any manufactures of any kind, a few of those coarser household manufactures

tures. The corn of the rich country, therefore, will not always, in
the same degree of goodness, come cheaper to market than that of

excepted, without which no country can well subsist.
This great increase in the quantity of work, which, in conse-

the poor. The corn of Poland, in the same degree of goodness, is as
cheap as that of France, notwithstanding the superior opulence

quence of the division of labour, the same number of people are
capable of performing, is owing to three different circumstances;

and improvement of the latter country. The corn of France is, in
the corn-provinces, fully as good, and in most years nearly about

first, to the increase of dexterity in every particular workman; secondly, to the saving of the time which is commonly lost in passing

the same price with the corn of England, though, in opulence and
improvement, France is perhaps inferior to England. The corn-

from one species of work to another; and, lastly, to the invention
of a great number of machines which facilitate and abridge labour,

lands of England, however, are better cultivated than those of
France, and the corn-lands of France are said to be much better

and enable one man to do the work of many.
First, the improvement of the dexterity of the workmen, neces-

cultivated than those of Poland. But though the poor country,
notwithstanding the inferiority of its cultivation, can, in some

sarily increases the quantity of the work he can perform; and the
division of labour, by reducing every man’s business to some one

measure, rival the rich in the cheapness and goodness of its corn,
it can pretend to no such competition in its manufactures, at least

simple operation, and by making this operation the sole employment of his life, necessarily increases very much the dexterity of

if those manufactures suit the soil, climate, and situation, of the
rich country. The silks of France are better and cheaper than those

the workman. A common smith, who, though accustomed to
handle the hammer, has never been used to make nails, if, upon

of England, because the silk manufacture, at least under the present

some particular occasion, he is obliged to attempt it, will scarce, I

13

The Wealth of Nations
am assured, be able to make above two or three hundred nails in a
day, and those, too, very bad ones. A smith who has been accus-

impossible to pass very quickly from one kind of work to another,
that is carried on in a different place, and with quite different

tomed to make nails, but whose sole or principal business has not
been that of a nailer, can seldom, with his utmost diligence, make

tools. A country weaver, who cultivates a small farm, must loose a
good deal of time in passing from his loom to the field, and from

more than eight hundred or a thousand nails in a day. I have seen
several boys, under twenty years of age, who had never exercised

the field to his loom. When the two trades can be carried on in the
same workhouse, the loss of time is, no doubt, much less. It is,

any other trade but that of making nails, and who, when they
exerted themselves, could make, each of them, upwards of two

even in this case, however, very considerable. A man commonly
saunters a little in turning his hand from one sort of employment

thousand three hundred nails in a day. The making of a nail, however, is by no means one of the simplest operations. The same

to another. When he first begins the new work, he is seldom very
keen and hearty; his mind, as they say, does not go to it, and for

person blows the bellows, stirs or mends the fire as there is occasion, heats the iron, and forges every part of the nail: in forging

some time he rather trifles than applies to good purpose. The habit
of sauntering, and of indolent careless application, which is natu-

the head, too, he is obliged to change his tools. The different operations into which the making of a pin, or of a metal button, is

rally, or rather necessarily, acquired by every country workman
who is obliged to change his work and his tools every half hour,

subdivided, are all of them much more simple, and the dexterity
of the person, of whose life it has been the sole business to per-

and to apply his hand in twenty different ways almost every day of
his life, renders him almost always slothful and lazy, and incapable

form them, is usually much greater. The rapidity with which some
of the operations of those manufactures are performed, exceeds

of any vigorous application, even on the most pressing occasions.
Independent, therefore, of his deficiency in point of dexterity, this

what the human hand could, by those who had never seen them,
he supposed capable of acquiring.

cause alone must always reduce considerably the quantity of work
which he is capable of performing.

Secondly, The advantage which is gained by saving the time
commonly lost in passing from one sort of work to another, is

Thirdly, and lastly, everybody must be sensible how much labour
is facilitated and abridged by the application of proper machinery.

much greater than we should at first view be apt to imagine it. It is

It is unnecessary to give any example. I shall only observe, there-

14

Adam Smith
fore, that the invention of all those machines by which labour is
so much facilitated and abridged, seems to have been originally

nately the communication between the boiler and the cylinder,
according as the piston either ascended or descended. One of those

owing to the division of labour. Men are much more likely to
discover easier and readier methods of attaining any object, when

boys, who loved to play with his companions, observed that, by
tying a string from the handle of the valve which opened this com-

the whole attention of their minds is directed towards that single
object, than when it is dissipated among a great variety of things.

munication to another part of the machine, the valve would open
and shut without his assistance, and leave him at liberty to divert

But, in consequence of the division of labour, the whole of every
man’s attention comes naturally to be directed towards some one

himself with his play-fellows. One of the greatest improvements
that has been made upon this machine, since it was first invented,

very simple object. It is naturally to be expected, therefore, that
some one or other of those who are employed in each particular

was in this manner the discovery of a boy who wanted to save his
own labour.

branch of labour should soon find out easier and readier methods
of performing their own particular work, whenever the nature of

All the improvements in machinery, however, have by no means
been the inventions of those who had occasion to use the ma-

it admits of such improvement. A great part of the machines made
use of in those manufactures in which labour is most subdivided,

chines. Many improvements have been made by the ingenuity of
the makers of the machines, when to make them became the busi-

were originally the invention of common workmen, who, being
each of them employed in some very simple operation, naturally

ness of a peculiar trade; and some by that of those who are called
philosophers, or men of speculation, whose trade it is not to do

turned their thoughts towards finding out easier and readier methods of performing it. Whoever has been much accustomed to visit

any thing, but to observe every thing, and who, upon that account, are often capable of combining together the powers of the

such manufactures, must frequently have been shewn very pretty
machines, which were the inventions of such workmen, in order

most distant and dissimilar objects in the progress of society, philosophy or speculation becomes, like every other employment,

to facilitate and quicken their own particular part of the work. In
the first fire engines {this was the current designation for steam

the principal or sole trade and occupation of a particular class of
citizens. Like every other employment, too, it is subdivided into a

engines}, a boy was constantly employed to open and shut alter-

great number of different branches, each of which affords occupa-

15

The Wealth of Nations
tion to a peculiar tribe or class of philosophers; and this subdivision
of employment in philosophy, as well as in every other business,

pear, is the produce of the joint labour of a great multitude of
workmen. The shepherd, the sorter of the wool, the wool-comber

improve dexterity, and saves time. Each individual becomes more
expert in his own peculiar branch, more work is done upon the

or carder, the dyer, the scribbler, the spinner, the weaver, the fuller,
the dresser, with many others, must all join their different arts in

whole, and the quantity of science is considerably increased by it.
It is the great multiplication of the productions of all the differ-

order to complete even this homely production. How many merchants and carriers, besides, must have been employed in trans-

ent arts, in consequence of the division of labour, which occasions, in a well-governed society, that universal opulence which

porting the materials from some of those workmen to others who
often live in a very distant part of the country? How much com-

extends itself to the lowest ranks of the people. Every workman
has a great quantity of his own work to dispose of beyond what he

merce and navigation in particular, how many ship-builders, sailors, sail-makers, rope-makers, must have been employed in order

himself has occasion for; and every other workman being exactly
in the same situation, he is enabled to exchange a great quantity of

to bring together the different drugs made use of by the dyer,
which often come from the remotest corners of the world? What a

his own goods for a great quantity or, what comes to the same
thing, for the price of a great quantity of theirs. He supplies them

variety of labour, too, is necessary in order to produce the tools of
the meanest of those workmen! To say nothing of such compli-

abundantly with what they have occasion for, and they accommodate him as amply with what he has occasion for, and a general

cated machines as the ship of the sailor, the mill of the fuller, or
even the loom of the weaver, let us consider only what a variety of

plenty diffuses itself through all the different ranks of the society.
Observe the accommodation of the most common artificer or

labour is requisite in order to form that very simple machine, the
shears with which the shepherd clips the wool. The miner, the

daylabourer in a civilized and thriving country, and you will perceive that the number of people, of whose industry a part, though

builder of the furnace for smelting the ore the feller of the timber,
the burner of the charcoal to be made use of in the smelting-

but a small part, has been employed in procuring him this accommodation, exceeds all computation. The woollen coat, for example,

house, the brickmaker, the bricklayer, the workmen who attend
the furnace, the millwright, the forger, the smith, must all of them

which covers the day-labourer, as coarse and rough as it may ap-

join their different arts in order to produce them. Were we to

16

Adam Smith
examine, in the same manner, all the different parts of his dress
and household furniture, the coarse linen shirt which he wears

luxury of the great, his accommodation must no doubt appear
extremely simple and easy; and yet it may be true, perhaps, that

next his skin, the shoes which cover his feet, the bed which he lies
on, and all the different parts which compose it, the kitchen-grate

the accommodation of an European prince does not always so
much exceed that of an industrious and frugal peasant, as the ac-

at which he prepares his victuals, the coals which he makes use of
for that purpose, dug from the bowels of the earth, and brought

commodation of the latter exceeds that of many an African king,
the absolute masters of the lives and liberties of ten thousand na-

to him, perhaps, by a long sea and a long land-carriage, all the
other utensils of his kitchen, all the furniture of his table, the knives

ked savages.

and forks, the earthen or pewter plates upon which he serves up
and divides his victuals, the different hands employed in preparing his bread and his beer, the glass window which lets in the heat
and the light, and keeps out the wind and the rain, with all the
knowledge and art requisite for preparing that beautiful and happy
invention, without which these northern parts of the world could
scarce have afforded a very comfortable habitation, together with
the tools of all the different workmen employed in producing those
different conveniencies; if we examine, I say, all these things, and
consider what a variety of labour is employed about each of them,
we shall be sensible that, without the assistance and co-operation
of many thousands, the very meanest person in a civilized country
could not be provided, even according to, what we very falsely
imagine, the easy and simple manner in which he is commonly
accommodated. Compared, indeed, with the more extravagant

17

The Wealth of Nations

CHAPTER II

dental concurrence of their passions in the same object at that
particular time. Nobody ever saw a dog make a fair and deliberate

OF THE PRINCIPLE WHICH GIVES OCCASION TO THE DIVISION OF LABOUR

exchange of one bone for another with another dog. Nobody ever
saw one animal, by its gestures and natural cries signify to an-

THIS DIVISION OF LABOUR, from which so many advantages are de-

other, this is mine, that yours; I am willing to give this for that.
When an animal wants to obtain something either of a man, or of

rived, is not originally the effect of any human wisdom, which
foresees and intends that general opulence to which it gives occa-

another animal, it has no other means of persuasion, but to gain
the favour of those whose service it requires. A puppy fawns upon

sion. It is the necessary, though very slow and gradual, consequence
of a certain propensity in human nature, which has in view no

its dam, and a spaniel endeavours, by a thousand attractions, to
engage the attention of its master who is at dinner, when it wants

such extensive utility; the propensity to truck, barter, and exchange
one thing for another.

to be fed by him. Man sometimes uses the same arts with his
brethren, and when he has no other means of engaging them to

Whether this propensity be one of those original principles in
human nature, of which no further account can be given, or

act according to his inclinations, endeavours by every servile and
fawning attention to obtain their good will. He has not time, how-

whether, as seems more probable, it be the necessary consequence
of the faculties of reason and speech, it belongs not to our present

ever, to do this upon every occasion. In civilized society he stands
at all times in need of the co-operation and assistance of great

subject to inquire. It is common to all men, and to be found in no
other race of animals, which seem to know neither this nor any

multitudes, while his whole life is scarce sufficient to gain the friendship of a few persons. In almost every other race of animals, each

other species of contracts. Two greyhounds, in running down the
same hare, have sometimes the appearance of acting in some sort

individual, when it is grown up to maturity, is entirely independent, and in its natural state has occasion for the assistance of no

of concert. Each turns her towards his companion, or endeavours
to intercept her when his companion turns her towards himself.

other living creature. But man has almost constant occasion for
the help of his brethren, and it is in vain for him to expect it from

This, however, is not the effect of any contract, but of the acci-

their benevolence only. He will be more likely to prevail if he can

18

Adam Smith
interest their self-love in his favour, and shew them that it is for
their own advantage to do for him what he requires of them.

can buy either food, clothes, or lodging, as he has occasion.
As it is by treaty, by barter, and by purchase, that we obtain

Whoever offers to another a bargain of any kind, proposes to do
this. Give me that which I want, and you shall have this which

from one another the greater part of those mutual good offices
which we stand in need of, so it is this same trucking disposition

you want, is the meaning of every such offer; and it is in this
manner that we obtain from one another the far greater part of

which originally gives occasion to the division of labour. In a tribe
of hunters or shepherds, a particular person makes bows and ar-

those good offices which we stand in need of. It is not from the
benevolence of the butcher the brewer, or the baker that we expect

rows, for example, with more readiness and dexterity than any
other. He frequently exchanges them for cattle or for venison, with

our dinner, but from their regard to their own interest. We address ourselves, not to their humanity, but to their self-love, and

his companions; and he finds at last that he can, in this manner,
get more cattle and venison, than if he himself went to the field to

never talk to them of our own necessities, but of their advantages.
Nobody but a beggar chooses to depend chiefly upon the benevo-

catch them. From a regard to his own interest, therefore, the making of bows and arrows grows to be his chief business, and he

lence of his fellow-citizens. Even a beggar does not depend upon
it entirely. The charity of well-disposed people, indeed, supplies

becomes a sort of armourer. Another excels in making the frames
and covers of their little huts or moveable houses. He is accus-

him with the whole fund of his subsistence. But though this principle ultimately provides him with all the necessaries of life which

tomed to be of use in this way to his neighbours, who reward him
in the same manner with cattle and with venison, till at last he

he has occasion for, it neither does nor can provide him with them
as he has occasion for them. The greater part of his occasional

finds it his interest to dedicate himself entirely to this employment, and to become a sort of house-carpenter. In the same man-

wants are supplied in the same manner as those of other people,
by treaty, by barter, and by purchase. With the money which one

ner a third becomes a smith or a brazier; a fourth, a tanner or
dresser of hides or skins, the principal part of the clothing of sav-

man gives him he purchases food. The old clothes which another
bestows upon him he exchanges for other clothes which suit him

ages. And thus the certainty of being able to exchange all that
surplus part of the produce of his own labour, which is over and

better, or for lodging, or for food, or for money, with which he

above his own consumption, for such parts of the produce of other

19

The Wealth of Nations
men’s labour as he may have occasion for, encourages every man
to apply himself to a particular occupation, and to cultivate and

employment as could alone give occasion to any great difference
of talents.

bring to perfection whatever talent of genius he may possess for
that particular species of business.

As it is this disposition which forms that difference of talents, so
remarkable among men of different professions, so it is this same

The difference of natural talents in different men, is, in reality,
much less than we are aware of; and the very different genius which

disposition which renders that difference useful. Many tribes of
animals, acknowledged to be all of the same species, derive from

appears to distinguish men of different professions, when grown
up to maturity, is not upon many occasions so much the cause, as

nature a much more remarkable distinction of genius, than what,
antecedent to custom and education, appears to take place among

the effect of the division of labour. The difference between the
most dissimilar characters, between a philosopher and a common

men. By nature a philosopher is not in genius and disposition half
so different from a street porter, as a mastiff is from a grey-hound,

street porter, for example, seems to arise not so much from nature,
as from habit, custom, and education. When they came in to the

or a grey-hound from a spaniel, or this last from a shepherd’s dog.
Those different tribes of animals, however, though all of the same

world, and for the first six or eight years of their existence, they
were, perhaps, very much alike, and neither their parents nor play-

species are of scarce any use to one another. The strength of the
mastiff is not in the least supported either by the swiftness of the

fellows could perceive any remarkable difference. About that age,
or soon after, they come to be employed in very different occupa-

greyhound, or by the sagacity of the spaniel, or by the docility of
the shepherd’s dog. The effects of those different geniuses and tal-

tions. The difference of talents comes then to be taken notice of,
and widens by degrees, till at last the vanity of the philosopher is

ents, for want of the power or disposition to barter and exchange,
cannot be brought into a common stock, and do not in the least

willing to acknowledge scarce any resemblance. But without the
disposition to truck, barter, and exchange, every man must have

contribute to the better accommodation and conveniency of the
species. Each animal is still obliged to support and defend itself,

procured to himself every necessary and conveniency of life which
he wanted. All must have had the same duties to perform, and the

separately and independently, and derives no sort of advantage
from that variety of talents with which nature has distinguished

same work to do, and there could have been no such difference of

its fellows. Among men, on the contrary, the most dissimilar ge-

20

Adam Smith
niuses are of use to one another; the different produces of their
respective talents, by the general disposition to truck, barter, and

CHAPTER III

exchange, being brought, as it were, into a common stock, where
every man may purchase whatever part of the produce of other

THAT THE DIVISION OF LABOUR IS LIMITED BY THE EXTENT OF THE MARKET

men’s talents he has occasion for,
AS IT IS THE POWER of exchanging that gives occasion to the division of labour, so the extent of this division must always be limited by the extent of that power, or, in other words, by the extent
of the market. When the market is very small, no person can have
any encouragement to dedicate himself entirely to one employment, for want of the power to exchange all that surplus part of
the produce of his own labour, which is over and above his own
consumption, for such parts of the produce of other men’s labour
as he has occasion for.
There are some sorts of industry, even of the lowest kind, which
can be carried on nowhere but in a great town. A porter, for example, can find employment and subsistence in no other place. A
village is by much too narrow a sphere for him; even an ordinary
market-town is scarce large enough to afford him constant occupation. In the lone houses and very small villages which are scattered about in so desert a country as the highlands of Scotland,
every farmer must be butcher, baker, and brewer, for his own family. In such situations we can scarce expect to find even a smith, a

21

The Wealth of Nations
carpenter, or a mason, within less than twenty miles of another of
the same trade. The scattered families that live at eight or ten miles

kind naturally begins to subdivide and improve itself, and it is
frequently not till a long time after that those improvements ex-

distance from the nearest of them, must learn to perform themselves a great number of little pieces of work, for which, in more

tend themselves to the inland parts of the country. A broad-wheeled
waggon, attended by two men, and drawn by eight horses, in about

populous countries, they would call in the assistance of those workmen. Country workmen are almost everywhere obliged to apply

six weeks time, carries and brings back between London and
Edinburgh near four ton weight of goods. In about the same time

themselves to all the different branches of industry that have so
much affinity to one another as to be employed about the same

a ship navigated by six or eight men, and sailing between the ports
of London and Leith, frequently carries and brings back two hun-

sort of materials. A country carpenter deals in every sort of work
that is made of wood; a country smith in every sort of work that is

dred ton weight of goods. Six or eight men, therefore, by the help
of water-carriage, can carry and bring back, in the same time, the

made of iron. The former is not only a carpenter, but a joiner, a
cabinet-maker, and even a carver in wood, as well as a wheel-wright,

same quantity of goods between London and Edinburgh as fifty
broad-wheeled waggons, attended by a hundred men, and drawn

a plough-wright, a cart and waggon-maker. The employments of
the latter are still more various. It is impossible there should be

by four hundred horses. Upon two hundred tons of goods, therefore, carried by the cheapest land-carriage from London to

such a trade as even that of a nailer in the remote and inland parts
of the highlands of Scotland. Such a workman at the rate of a

Edinburgh, there must be charged the maintenance of a hundred
men for three weeks, and both the maintenance and what is nearly

thousand nails a-day, and three hundred working days in the year,
will make three hundred thousand nails in the year. But in such a

equal to maintenance the wear and tear of four hundred horses, as
well as of fifty great waggons. Whereas, upon the same quantity of

situation it would be impossible to dispose of one thousand, that
is, of one day’s work in the year. As by means of water-carriage, a

goods carried by water, there is to be charged only the maintenance of six or eight men, and the wear and tear of a ship of two

more extensive market is opened to every sort of industry than
what land-carriage alone can afford it, so it is upon the sea-coast,

hundred tons burthen, together with the value of the superior
risk, or the difference of the insurance between land and water-

and along the banks of navigable rivers, that industry of every

carriage. Were there no other communication between those two

22

Adam Smith
places, therefore, but by land-carriage, as no goods could be transported from the one to the other, except such whose price was

sea-coast, and the great navigable rivers. The extent of the market,
therefore, must for a long time be in proportion to the riches and

very considerable in proportion to their weight, they could carry
on but a small part of that commerce which at present subsists

populousness of that country, and consequently their improvement must always be posterior to the improvement of that coun-

between them, and consequently could give but a small part of
that encouragement which they at present mutually afford to each

try. In our North American colonies, the plantations have constantly followed either the sea-coast or the banks of the navigable

other’s industry. There could be little or no commerce of any kind
between the distant parts of the world. What goods could bear the

rivers, and have scarce anywhere extended themselves to any considerable distance from both.

expense of land-carriage between London and Calcutta? Or if there
were any so precious as to be able to support this expense, with

The nations that, according to the best authenticated history,
appear to have been first civilized, were those that dwelt round the

what safety could they be transported through the territories of so
many barbarous nations? Those two cities, however, at present

coast of the Mediterranean sea. That sea, by far the greatest inlet
that is known in the world, having no tides, nor consequently any

carry on a very considerable commerce with each other, and by
mutually affording a market, give a good deal of encouragement

waves, except such as are caused by the wind only, was, by the
smoothness of its surface, as well as by the multitude of its islands,

to each other’s industry.
Since such, therefore, are the advantages of water-carriage, it is

and the proximity of its neighbouring shores, extremely favourable
to the infant navigation of the world; when, from their ignorance

natural that the first improvements of art and industry should be
made where this conveniency opens the whole world for a market

of the compass, men were afraid to quit the view of the coast, and
from the imperfection of the art of ship-building, to abandon them-

to the produce of every sort of labour, and that they should always
be much later in extending themselves into the inland parts of the

selves to the boisterous waves of the ocean. To pass beyond the
pillars of Hercules, that is, to sail out of the straits of Gibraltar,

country. The inland parts of the country can for a long time have
no other market for the greater part of their goods, but the coun-

was, in the ancient world, long considered as a most wonderful
and dangerous exploit of navigation. It was late before even the

try which lies round about them, and separates them from the

Phoenicians and Carthaginians, the most skilful navigators and

23

The Wealth of Nations
ship-builders of those old times, attempted it; and they were, for a
long time, the only nations that did attempt it.

multitude of canals, and, by communicating with one another, afford an inland navigation much more extensive than that either of

Of all the countries on the coast of the Mediterranean sea, Egypt
seems to have been the first in which either agriculture or manu-

the Nile or the Ganges, or, perhaps, than both of them put together.
It is remarkable, that neither the ancient Egyptians, nor the Indians,

factures were cultivated and improved to any considerable degree.
Upper Egypt extends itself nowhere above a few miles from the

nor the Chinese, encouraged foreign commerce, but seem all to
have derived their great opulence from this inland navigation.

Nile; and in Lower Egypt, that great river breaks itself into many
different canals, which, with the assistance of a little art, seem to

All the inland parts of Africa, and all that part of Asia which lies
any considerable way north of the Euxine and Caspian seas, the

have afforded a communication by water-carriage, not only between all the great towns, but between all the considerable vil-

ancient Scythia, the modern Tartary and Siberia, seem, in all ages
of the world, to have been in the same barbarous and uncivilized

lages, and even to many farm-houses in the country, nearly in the
same manner as the Rhine and the Maese do in Holland at present.

state in which we find them at present. The sea of Tartary is the
frozen ocean, which admits of no navigation; and though some of

The extent and easiness of this inland navigation was probably
one of the principal causes of the early improvement of Egypt.

the greatest rivers in the world run through that country, they are
at too great a distance from one another to carry commerce and

The improvements in agriculture and manufactures seem likewise to have been of very great antiquity in the provinces of Ben-

communication through the greater part of it. There are in Africa
none of those great inlets, such as the Baltic and Adriatic seas in

gal, in the East Indies, and in some of the eastern provinces of
China, though the great extent of this antiquity is not authenti-

Europe, the Mediterranean and Euxine seas in both Europe and
Asia, and the gulfs of Arabia, Persia, India, Bengal, and Siam, in

cated by any histories of whose authority we, in this part of the
world, are well assured. In Bengal, the Ganges, and several other

Asia, to carry maritime commerce into the interior parts of that
great continent; and the great rivers of Africa are at too great a

great rivers, form a great number of navigable canals, in the same
manner as the Nile does in Egypt. In the eastern provinces of

distance from one another to give occasion to any considerable
inland navigation. The commerce, besides, which any nation can

China, too, several great rivers form, by their different branches, a

carry on by means of a river which does not break itself into any

24

Adam Smith
great number of branches or canals, and which runs into another
territory before it reaches the sea, can never be very considerable,

CHAPTER IV

because it is always in the power of the nations who possess that
other territory to obstruct the communication between the upper

OF THE ORIGIN AND USE OF MONEY

country and the sea. The navigation of the Danube is of very little
use to the different states of Bavaria, Austria, and Hungary, in

WHEN THE DIVISION OF LABOUR has been once thoroughly established, it is but a very small part of a man’s wants which the pro-

comparison of what it would be, if any of them possessed the
whole of its course, till it falls into the Black sea.

duce of his own labour can supply. He supplies the far greater part
of them by exchanging that surplus part of the produce of his own
labour, which is over and above his own consumption, for such
parts of the produce of other men’s labour as he has occasion for.
Every man thus lives by exchanging, or becomes, in some measure, a merchant, and the society itself grows to be what is properly a commercial society.
But when the division of labour first began to take place, this
power of exchanging must frequently have been very much clogged
and embarrassed in its operations. One man, we shall suppose,
has more of a certain commodity than he himself has occasion for,
while another has less. The former, consequently, would be glad
to dispose of; and the latter to purchase, a part of this superfluity.
But if this latter should chance to have nothing that the former
stands in need of, no exchange can be made between them. The
butcher has more meat in his shop than he himself can consume,
and the brewer and the baker would each of them be willing to

25

The Wealth of Nations
purchase a part of it. But they have nothing to offer in exchange,
except the different productions of their respective trades, and the

parts of the coast of India; dried cod at Newfoundland; tobacco in
Virginia; sugar in some of our West India colonies; hides or dressed

butcher is already provided with all the bread and beer which he
has immediate occasion for. No exchange can, in this case, be made

leather in some other countries; and there is at this day a village In
Scotland, where it is not uncommon, I am told, for a workman to

between them. He cannot be their merchant, nor they his customers; and they are all of them thus mutually less serviceable to

carry nails instead of money to the baker’s shop or the ale-house.
In all countries, however, men seem at last to have been deter-

one another. In order to avoid the inconveniency of such situations, every prudent man in every period of society, after the first

mined by irresistible reasons to give the preference, for this employment, to metals above every other commodity. Metals can

establishment of the division of labour, must naturally have endeavoured to manage his affairs in such a manner, as to have at all

not only be kept with as little loss as any other commodity, scarce
any thing being less perishable than they are, but they can like-

times by him, besides the peculiar produce of his own industry, a
certain quantity of some one commodity or other, such as he imag-

wise, without any loss, be divided into any number of parts, as by
fusion those parts can easily be re-united again; a quality which

ined few people would be likely to refuse in exchange for the produce of their industry. Many different commodities, it is prob-

no other equally durable commodities possess, and which, more
than any other quality, renders them fit to be the instruments of

able, were successively both thought of and employed for this
purpose. In the rude ages of society, cattle are said to have been

commerce and circulation. The man who wanted to buy salt, for
example, and had nothing but cattle to give in exchange for it,

the common instrument of commerce; and, though they must
have been a most inconvenient one, yet, in old times, we find

must have been obliged to buy salt to the value of a whole ox, or a
whole sheep, at a time. He could seldom buy less than this, be-

things were frequently valued according to the number of cattle
which had been given in exchange for them. The armour of

cause what he was to give for it could seldom be divided without
loss; and if he had a mind to buy more, he must, for the same

Diomede, says Homer, cost only nine oxen; but that of Glaucus
cost a hundred oxen. Salt is said to be the common instrument of

reasons, have been obliged to buy double or triple the quantity,
the value, to wit, of two or three oxen, or of two or three sheep. If,

commerce and exchanges in Abyssinia; a species of shells in some

on the contrary, instead of sheep or oxen, he had metals to give in

26

Adam Smith
exchange for it, he could easily proportion the quantity of the
metal to the precise quantity of the commodity which he had

less accuracy would, no doubt, be necessary. Yet we should find it
excessively troublesome if every time a poor man had occasion

immediate occasion for.
Different metals have been made use of by different nations for

either to buy or sell a farthing’s worth of goods, he was obliged to
weigh the farthing. The operation of assaying is still more diffi-

this purpose. Iron was the common instrument of commerce
among the ancient Spartans, copper among the ancient Romans,

cult, still more tedious; and, unless a part of the metal is fairly
melted in the crucible, with proper dissolvents, any conclusion

and gold and silver among all rich and commercial nations.
Those metals seem originally to have been made use of for this

that can be drawn from it is extremely uncertain. Before the institution of coined money, however, unless they went through this

purpose in rude bars, without any stamp or coinage. Thus we are
told by Pliny (Plin. Hist Nat. lib. 33, cap. 3), upon the authority

tedious and difficult operation, people must always have been liable to the grossest frauds and impositions; and instead of a pound

of Timaeus, an ancient historian, that, till the time of Servius
Tullius, the Romans had no coined money, but made use of

weight of pure silver, or pure copper, might receive, in exchange
for their goods, an adulterated composition of the coarsest and

unstamped bars of copper, to purchase whatever they had occasion for. These rude bars, therefore, performed at this time the

cheapest materials, which had, however, in their outward appearance, been made to resemble those metals. To prevent such abuses,

function of money.
The use of metals in this rude state was attended with two very

to facilitate exchanges, and thereby to encourage all sorts of industry and commerce, it has been found necessary, in all countries

considerable inconveniences; first, with the trouble of weighing,
and secondly, with that of assaying them. In the precious metals,

that have made any considerable advances towards improvement,
to affix a public stamp upon certain quantities of such particular

where a small difference in the quantity makes a great difference
in the value, even the business of weighing, with proper exactness,

metals, as were in those countries commonly made use of to purchase goods. Hence the origin of coined money, and of those pub-

requires at least very accurate weights and scales. The weighing of
gold, in particular, is an operation of some nicety In the coarser

lic offices called mints; institutions exactly of the same nature with
those of the aulnagers and stamp-masters of woollen and linen

metals, indeed, where a small error would be of little consequence,

cloth. All of them are equally meant to ascertain, by means of a

27

The Wealth of Nations
public stamp, the quantity and uniform goodness of those different commodities when brought to market.

the edges too, was supposed to ascertain not only the fineness, but
the weight of the metal. Such coins, therefore, were received by

The first public stamps of this kind that were affixed to the
current metals, seem in many cases to have been intended to as-

tale, as at present, without the trouble of weighing.
The denominations of those coins seem originally to have ex-

certain, what it was both most difficult and most important to
ascertain, the goodness or fineness of the metal, and to have re-

pressed the weight or quantity of metal contained in them. In the
time of Servius Tullius, who first coined money at Rome, the Ro-

sembled the sterling mark which is at present affixed to plate and
bars of silver, or the Spanish mark which is sometimes affixed to

man as or pondo contained a Roman pound of good copper. It
was divided, in the same manner as our Troyes pound, into twelve

ingots of gold, and which, being struck only upon one side of the
piece, and not covering the whole surface, ascertains the fineness,

ounces, each of which contained a real ounce of good copper. The
English pound sterling, in the time of Edward I. contained a pound,

but not the weight of the metal. Abraham weighs to Ephron the
four hundred shekels of silver which he had agreed to pay for the

Tower weight, of silver of a known fineness. The Tower pound
seems to have been something more than the Roman pound, and

field of Machpelah. They are said, however, to be the current money
of the merchant, and yet are received by weight, and not by tale, in

something less than the Troyes pound. This last was not introduced into the mint of England till the 18th of Henry the VIII.

the same manner as ingots of gold and bars of silver are at present.
The revenues of the ancient Saxon kings of England are said to have

The French livre contained, in the time of Charlemagne, a pound,
Troyes weight, of silver of a known fineness. The fair of Troyes in

been paid, not in money, but in kind, that is, in victuals and provisions of all sorts. William the Conqueror introduced the custom of

Champaign was at that time frequented by all the nations of Europe, and the weights and measures of so famous a market were

paying them in money. This money, however, was for a long time,
received at the exchequer, by weight, and not by tale.

generally known and esteemed. The Scots money pound contained,
from the time of Alexander the First to that of Robert Bruce, a

The inconveniency and difficulty of weighing those metals with
exactness, gave occasion to the institution of coins, of which the

pound of silver of the same weight and fineness with the English
pound sterling. English, French, and Scots pennies, too, contained

stamp, covering entirely both sides of the piece, and sometimes

all of them originally a real penny-weight of silver, the twentieth

28

Adam Smith
part of an ounce, and the two hundred-and-fortieth part of a
pound. The shilling, too, seems originally to have been the de-

duced to the twenty-fourth part of its original value, and, instead
of weighing a pound, came to weigh only half an ounce. The En-

nomination of a weight. “When wheat is at twelve shillings the
quarter,” says an ancient statute of Henry III. “then wastel bread

glish pound and penny contain at present about a third only; the
Scots pound and penny about a thirty-sixth; and the French pound

of a farthing shall weigh eleven shillings and fourpence”. The proportion, however, between the shilling, and either the penny on

and penny about a sixty-sixth part of their original value. By means
of those operations, the princes and sovereign states which per-

the one hand, or the pound on the other, seems not to have been
so constant and uniform as that between the penny and the pound.

formed them were enabled, in appearance, to pay their debts and
fulfil their engagements with a smaller quantity of silver than would

During the first race of the kings of France, the French sou or
shilling appears upon different occasions to have contained five,

otherwise have been requisite. It was indeed in appearance only;
for their creditors were really defrauded of a part of what was due

twelve, twenty, and forty pennies. Among the ancient Saxons, a
shilling appears at one time to have contained only five pennies,

to them. All other debtors in the state were allowed the same privilege, and might pay with the same nominal sum of the new and

and it is not improbable that it may have been as variable among
them as among their neighbours, the ancient Franks. From the

debased coin whatever they had borrowed in the old. Such operations, therefore, have always proved favourable to the debtor, and

time of Charlemagne among the French, and from that of William the Conqueror among the English, the proportion between

ruinous to the creditor, and have sometimes produced a greater
and more universal revolution in the fortunes of private persons,

the pound, the shilling, and the penny, seems to have been uniformly the same as at present, though the value of each has been

than could have been occasioned by a very great public calamity.
It is in this manner that money has become, in all civilized na-

very different; for in every country of the world, I believe, the
avarice and injustice of princes and sovereign states, abusing the

tions, the universal instrument of commerce, by the intervention
of which goods of all kinds are bought and sold, or exchanged for

confidence of their subjects, have by degrees diminished the real
quantity of metal, which had been originally contained in their

one another.
What are the rules which men naturally observe, in exchanging

coins. The Roman as, in the latter ages of the republic, was re-

them either for money, or for one another, I shall now proceed to

29

The Wealth of Nations
examine. These rules determine what may be called the relative or
exchangeable value of goods.

are the causes which sometimes hinder the market price, that is,
the actual price of commodities, from coinciding exactly with what

The word VALUE, it is to be observed, has two different meanings, and sometimes expresses the utility of some particular ob-

may be called their natural price.
I shall endeavour to explain, as fully and distinctly as I can,

ject, and sometimes the power of purchasing other goods which
the possession of that object conveys. The one may be called ‘value

those three subjects in the three following chapters, for which I
must very earnestly entreat both the patience and attention of the

in use;’ the other, ‘value in exchange.’ The things which have the
greatest value in use have frequently little or no value in exchange;

reader: his patience, in order to examine a detail which may, perhaps, in some places, appear unnecessarily tedious; and his atten-

and, on the contrary, those which have the greatest value in exchange have frequently little or no value in use. Nothing is more

tion, in order to understand what may perhaps, after the fullest
explication which I am capable of giving it, appear still in some

useful than water; but it will purchase scarce any thing; scarce any
thing can be had in exchange for it. A diamond, on the contrary,

degree obscure. I am always willing to run some hazard of being
tedious, in order to be sure that I am perspicuous; and, after tak-

has scarce any value in use; but a very great quantity of other
goods may frequently be had in exchange for it.

ing the utmost pains that I can to be perspicuous, some obscurity
may still appear to remain upon a subject, in its own nature ex-

In order to investigate the principles which regulate the exchangeable value of commodities, I shall endeavour to shew,

tremely abstracted.

First, what is the real measure of this exchangeable value; or
wherein consists the real price of all commodities.
Secondly, what are the different parts of which this real price is
composed or made up.
And, lastly, what are the different circumstances which sometimes raise some or all of these different parts of price above, and
sometimes sink them below, their natural or ordinary rate; or, what

30

Adam Smith

CHAPTER V

else, is the toil and trouble which it can save to himself, and which
it can impose upon other people. What is bought with money, or

OF THE REAL AND NOMINAL PRICE OF
COMMODITIES, OR OF THEIR PRICE IN
L ABOUR, AND THEIR PRICE IN MONEY

with goods, is purchased by labour, as much as what we acquire
by the toil of our own body. That money, or those goods, indeed,

EVERY MAN IS RICH OR POOR according to the degree in which he
can afford to enjoy the necessaries, conveniencies, and amusements

contain the value of an equal quantity. Labour was the first price,
the original purchase money that was paid for all things. It was

of human life. But after the division of labour has once thoroughly
taken place, it is but a very small part of these with which a man’s

not by gold or by silver, but by labour, that all the wealth of the
world was originally purchased; and its value, to those who pos-

own labour can supply him. The far greater part of them he must
derive from the labour of other people, and he must be rich or

sess it, and who want to exchange it for some new productions, is
precisely equal to the quantity of’ labour which it can enable them

poor according to the quantity of that labour which he can command, or which he can afford to purchase. The value of any com-

to purchase or command.
Wealth, as Mr Hobbes says, is power. But the person who either

modity, therefore, to the person who possesses it, and who means
not to use or consume it himself, but to exchange it for other

acquires, or succeeds to a great fortune, does not necessarily acquire or succeed to any political power, either civil or military. His

commodities, is equal to the quantity of labour which it enables
him to purchase or command. Labour therefore, is the real mea-

fortune may, perhaps, afford him the means of acquiring both;
but the mere possession of that fortune does not necessarily con-

sure of the exchangeable value of all commodities.
The real price of every thing, what every thing really costs to the

vey to him either. The power which that possession immediately
and directly conveys to him, is the power of purchasing a certain

man who wants to acquire it, is the toil and trouble of acquiring
it. What every thing is really worth to the man who has acquired

command over all the labour, or over all the produce of labour
which is then in the market. His fortune is greater or less, precisely

it and who wants to dispose of it, or exchange it for something

in proportion to the extent of this power, or to the quantity either

save us this toil. They contain the value of a certain quantity of
labour, which we exchange for what is supposed at the time to

31

The Wealth of Nations
of other men’s labour, or, what is the same thing, of the produce of
other men’s labour, which it enables him to purchase or command.

and thereby compared with, other commodities, than with labour.
It is more natural, therefore, to estimate its exchangeable value by

The exchangeable value of every thing must always be precisely
equal to the extent of this power which it conveys to its owner.

the quantity of some other commodity, than by that of the labour
which it can produce. The greater part of people, too, understand

But though labour be the real measure of the exchangeable value
of all commodities, it is not that by which their value is com-

better what is meant by a quantity of a particular commodity,
than by a quantity of labour. The one is a plain palpable object;

monly estimated. It is often difficult to ascertain the proportion
between two different quantities of labour. The time spent in two

the other an abstract notion, which though it can be made sufficiently intelligible, is not altogether so natural and obvious.

different sorts of work will not always alone determine this proportion. The different degrees of hardship endured, and of inge-

But when barter ceases, and money has become the common
instrument of commerce, every particular commodity is more fre-

nuity exercised, must likewise be taken into account. There may
be more labour in an hour’s hard work, than in two hours easy

quently exchanged for money than for any other commodity. The
butcher seldom carries his beef or his mutton to the baker or the

business; or in an hour’s application to a trade which it cost ten
years labour to learn, than in a month’s industry, at an ordinary

brewer, in order to exchange them for bread or for beer; but he
carries them to the market, where he exchanges them for money,

and obvious employment. But it is not easy to find any accurate
measure either of hardship or ingenuity. In exchanging, indeed,

and afterwards exchanges that money for bread and for beer. The
quantity of money which he gets for them regulates, too, the quan-

the different productions of different sorts of labour for one another, some allowance is commonly made for both. It is adjusted,

tity of bread and beer which he can afterwards purchase. It is more
natural and obvious to him, therefore, to estimate their value by

however, not by any accurate measure, but by the higgling and
bargaining of the market, according to that sort of rough equality

the quantity of money, the commodity for which he immediately
exchanges them, than by that of bread and beer, the commodities

which, though not exact, is sufficient for carrying on the business
of common life.

for which he can exchange them only by the intervention of another commodity; and rather to say that his butcher’s meat is worth

Every commodity, besides, Is more frequently exchanged for,

three-pence or fourpence a-pound, than that it is worth three or

32

Adam Smith
four pounds of bread, or three or four quarts of small beer. Hence
it comes to pass, that the exchangeable value of every commodity

own value, can never be an accurate measure of the value of other
commodities. Equal quantities of labour, at all times and places,

is more frequently estimated by the quantity of money, than by
the quantity either of labour or of any other commodity which

may be said to be of equal value to the labourer. In his ordinary
state of health, strength, and spirits; in the ordinary degree of his

can be had in exchange for it.
Gold and silver, however, like every other commodity, vary in

skill and dexterity, he must always lay down the same portion of
his ease, his liberty, and his happiness. The price which he pays

their value; are sometimes cheaper and sometimes dearer, sometimes of easier and sometimes of more difficult purchase. The

must always be the same, whatever may be the quantity of goods
which he receives in return for it. Of these, indeed, it may some-

quantity of labour which any particular quantity of them can purchase or command, or the quantity of other goods which it will

times purchase a greater and sometimes a smaller quantity; but it
is their value which varies, not that of the labour which purchases

exchange for, depends always upon the fertility or barrenness of
the mines which happen to be known about the time when such

them. At all times and places, that is dear which it is difficult to
come at, or which it costs much labour to acquire; and that cheap

exchanges are made. The discovery of the abundant mines of
America, reduced, in the sixteenth century, the value of gold and

which is to be had easily, or with very little labour. Labour alone,
therefore, never varying in its own value, is alone the ultimate and

silver in Europe to about a third of what it had been before. As it
cost less labour to bring those metals from the mine to the mar-

real standard by which the value of all commodities can at all
times and places be estimated and compared. It is their real price;

ket, so, when they were brought thither, they could purchase or
command less labour; and this revolution in their value, though

money is their nominal price only.
But though equal quantities of labour are always of equal value

perhaps the greatest, is by no means the only one of which history
gives some account. But as a measure of quantity, such as the natural

to the labourer, yet to the person who employs him they appear
sometimes to be of greater, and sometimes of smaller value. He

foot, fathom, or handful, which is continually varying in its own
quantity, can never be an accurate measure of the quantity of other

purchases them sometimes with a greater, and sometimes with a
smaller quantity of goods, and to him the price of labour seems to

things; so a commodity which is itself continually varying in its

vary like that of all other things. It appears to him dear in the one

33

The Wealth of Nations
case, and cheap in the other. In reality, however, it is the goods
which are cheap in the one case, and dear in the other.

Princes and sovereign states have frequently fancied that they had
a temporary interest to diminish the quantity of pure metal con-

In this popular sense, therefore, labour, like commodities, may
be said to have a real and a nominal price. Its real price may be

tained in their coins; but they seldom have fancied that they had
any to augment it. The quantity of metal contained in the coins, I

said to consist in the quantity of the necessaries and conveniencies
of life which are given for it; its nominal price, in the quantity of

believe of all nations, has accordingly been almost continually diminishing, and hardly ever augmenting. Such variations, therefore,

money. The labourer is rich or poor, is well or ill rewarded, in
proportion to the real, not to the nominal price of his labour.

tend almost always to diminish the value of a money rent.
The discovery of the mines of America diminished the value of

The distinction between the real and the nominal price of commodities and labour is not a matter of mere speculation, but may

gold and silver in Europe. This diminution, it is commonly supposed, though I apprehend without any certain proof, is still go-

sometimes be of considerable use in practice. The same real price
is always of the same value; but on account of the variations in the

ing on gradually, and is likely to continue to do so for a long time.
Upon this supposition, therefore, such variations are more likely

value of gold and silver, the same nominal price is sometimes of
very different values. When a landed estate, therefore, is sold with

to diminish than to augment the value of a money rent, even
though it should be stipulated to be paid, not in such a quantity

a reservation of a perpetual rent, if it is intended that this rent
should always be of the same value, it is of importance to the

of coined money of such a denomination (in so many pounds
sterling, for example), but in so many ounces, either of pure silver,

family in whose favour it is reserved, that it should not consist in
a particular sum of money. Its value would in this case be liable to

or of silver of a certain standard.
The rents which have been reserved in corn, have preserved their

variations of two different kinds: first, to those which arise from
the different quantities of gold and silver which are contained at

value much better than those which have been reserved in money,
even where the denomination of the coin has not been altered. By

different times in coin of the same denomination; and, secondly,
to those which arise from the different values of equal quantities

the 18th of Elizabeth, it was enacted, that a third of the rent of all
college leases should be reserved in corn, to be paid either in kind,

of gold and silver at different times.

or according to the current prices at the nearest public market.

34

Adam Smith
The money arising from this corn rent, though originally but a
third of the whole, is, in the present times, according to Dr.

haps, of any other commodity. Equal quantities of corn, therefore, will, at distant times, be more nearly of the same real value,

Blackstone, commonly near double of what arises from the other
two-thirds. The old money rents of colleges must, according to

or enable the possessor to purchase or command more nearly the
same quantity of the labour of other people. They will do this, I

this account, have sunk almost to a fourth part of their ancient
value, or are worth little more than a fourth part of the corn which

say, more nearly than equal quantities of almost any other commodity; for even equal quantities of corn will not do it exactly.

they were formerly worth. But since the reign of Philip and Mary,
the denomination of the English coin has undergone little or no

The subsistence of the labourer, or the real price of labour, as I
shall endeavour to shew hereafter, is very different upon different

alteration, and the same number of pounds, shillings, and pence,
have contained very nearly the same quantity of pure silver. This

occasions; more liberal in a society advancing to opulence, than in
one that is standing still, and in one that is standing still, than in

degradation, therefore, in the value of the money rents of colleges,
has arisen altogether from the degradation in the price of silver.

one that is going backwards. Every other commodity, however,
will, at any particular time, purchase a greater or smaller quantity

When the degradation in the value of silver is combined with
the diminution of the quantity of it contained in the coin of the

of labour, in proportion to the quantity of subsistence which it
can purchase at that time. A rent, therefore, reserved in corn, is

same denomination, the loss is frequently still greater. In Scotland, where the denomination of the coin has undergone much

liable only to the variations in the quantity of labour which a
certain quantity of corn can purchase. But a rent reserved in any

greater alterations than it ever did in England, and in France, where
it has undergone still greater than it ever did in Scotland, some

other commodity is liable, not only to the variations in the quantity of labour which any particular quantity of corn can purchase,

ancient rents, originally of considerable value, have, in this manner, been reduced almost to nothing.

but to the variations in the quantity of corn which can be purchased by any particular quantity of that commodity.

Equal quantities of labour will, at distant times, be purchased
more nearly with equal quantities of corn, the subsistence of the

Though the real value of a corn rent, it is to be observed, however, varies much less from century to century than that of a money

labourer, than with equal quantities of gold and silver, or, per-

rent, it varies much more from year to year. The money price of

35

The Wealth of Nations
labour, as I shall endeavour to shew hereafter, does not fluctuate
from year to year with the money price of corn, but seems to be

at the former, or will command double the quantity either of labour,
or of the greater part of other commodities; the money price of

everywhere accommodated, not to the temporary or occasional,
but to the average or ordinary price of that necessary of life. The

labour, and along with it that of most other things, continuing
the same during all these fluctuations.

average or ordinary price of corn, again is regulated, as I shall
likewise endeavour to shew hereafter, by the value of silver, by the

Labour, therefore, it appears evidently, is the only universal, as
well as the only accurate, measure of value, or the only standard

richness or barrenness of the mines which supply the market with
that metal, or by the quantity of labour which must be employed,

by which we can compare the values of different commodities, at
all times, and at all places. We cannot estimate, it is allowed, the

and consequently of corn which must be consumed, in order to
bring any particular quantity of silver from the mine to the mar-

real value of different commodities from century to century by
the quantities of silver which were given for them. We cannot

ket. But the value of silver, though it sometimes varies greatly from
century to century, seldom varies much from year to year, but

estimate it from year to year by the quantities of corn. By the
quantities of labour, we can, with the greatest accuracy, estimate

frequently continues the same, or very nearly the same, for half a
century or a century together. The ordinary or average money

it, both from century to century, and from year to year. From
century to century, corn is a better measure than silver, because,

price of corn, therefore, may, during so long a period, continue
the same, or very nearly the same, too, and along with it the money

from century to century, equal quantities of corn will command
the same quantity of labour more nearly than equal quantities of

price of labour, provided, at least, the society continues, in other
respects, in the same, or nearly in the same, condition. In the

silver. From year to year, on the contrary, silver is a better measure
than corn, because equal quantities of it will more nearly com-

mean time, the temporary and occasional price of corn may frequently be double one year of what it had been the year before, or

mand the same quantity of labour.
But though, in establishing perpetual rents, or even in letting

fluctuate, for example, from five-and-twenty to fifty shillings the
quarter. But when corn is at the latter price, not only the nominal,

very long leases, it may be of use to distinguish between real and
nominal price; it is of none in buying and selling, the more com-

but the real value of a corn rent, will be double of what it is when

mon and ordinary transactions of human life.

36

Adam Smith
At the same time and place, the real and the nominal price of all
commodities are exactly in proportion to one another. The more

ounce of silver was at London exactly of the same value as at Canton. It is of no importance to him that half an ounce of silver at

or less money you get for any commodity, in the London market,
for example, the more or less labour it will at that time and place

Canton would have given him the command of more labour, and
of a greater quantity of the necessaries and conveniencies of life

enable you to purchase or command. At the same time and place,
therefore, money is the exact measure of the real exchangeable

than an ounce can do at London. An ounce at London will always
give him the command of double the quantity of all these, which

value of all commodities. It is so, however, at the same time and
place only.

half an ounce could have done there, and this is precisely what he
wants.

Though at distant places there is no regular proportion between
the real and the money price of commodities, yet the merchant

As it is the nominal or money price of goods, therefore, which
finally determines the prudence or imprudence of all purchases

who carries goods from the one to the other, has nothing to consider but the money price, or the difference between the quantity

and sales, and thereby regulates almost the whole business of common life in which price is concerned, we cannot wonder that it

of silver for which he buys them, and that for which he is likely to
sell them. Half an ounce of silver at Canton in China may com-

should have been so much more attended to than the real price.
In such a work as this, however, it may sometimes be of use to

mand a greater quantity both of labour and of the necessaries and
conveniencies of life, than an ounce at London. A commodity,

compare the different real values of a particular commodity at
different times and places, or the different degrees of power over

therefore, which sells for half an ounce of silver at Canton, may
there be really dearer, of more real importance to the man who

the labour of other people which it may, upon different occasions,
have given to those who possessed it. We must in this case com-

possesses it there, than a commodity which sells for an ounce at
London is to the man who possesses it at London. If a London

pare, not so much the different quantities of silver for which it
was commonly sold, as the different quantities or labour which

merchant, however, can buy at Canton, for half an ounce of silver,
a commodity which he can afterwards sell at London for an ounce,

those different quantities of silver could have purchased. But the
current prices of labour, at distant times and places, can scarce

he gains a hundred per cent. by the bargain, just as much as if an

ever be known with any degree of exactness. Those of corn, though

37

The Wealth of Nations
they have in few places been regularly recorded, are in general better
known, and have been more frequently taken notice of by histori-

estates to have been computed, either in asses or in sestertii. The
as was always the denomination of a copper coin. The word

ans and other writers. We must generally, therefore, content ourselves with them, not as being always exactly in the same proportion

sestertius signifies two asses and a half. Though the sestertius, therefore, was originally a silver coin, its value was estimated in copper.

as the current prices of labour, but as being the nearest approximation which can commonly be had to that proportion. I shall hereaf-

At Rome, one who owed a great deal of money was said to have a
great deal of other people’s copper.

ter have occasion to make several comparisons of this kind.
In the progress of industry, commercial nations have found it

The northern nations who established themselves upon the ruins of the Roman empire, seem to have had silver money from the

convenient to coin several different metals into money; gold for
larger payments, silver for purchases of moderate value, and cop-

first beginning of their settlements, and not to have known either
gold or copper coins for several ages thereafter. There were silver

per, or some other coarse metal, for those of still smaller consideration, They have always, however, considered one of those metals

coins in England in the time of the Saxons; but there was little
gold coined till the time of Edward III nor any copper till that of

as more peculiarly the measure of value than any of the other two;
and this preference seems generally to have been given to the metal

James I. of Great Britain. In England, therefore, and for the same
reason, I believe, in all other modern nations of Europe, all ac-

which they happen first to make use of as the instrument of commerce. Having once begun to use it as their standard, which they

counts are kept, and the value of all goods and of all estates is
generally computed, in silver: and when we mean to express the

must have done when they had no other money, they have generally continued to do so even when the necessity was not the same.

amount of a person’s fortune, we seldom mention the number of
guineas, but the number of pounds sterling which we suppose

The Romans are said to have had nothing but copper money till
within five years before the first Punic war (Pliny, lib. xxxiii. cap.

would be given for it.
Originally, in all countries, I believe, a legal tender of payment

3), when they first began to coin silver. Copper, therefore, appears
to have continued always the measure of value in that republic. At

could be made only in the coin of that metal which was peculiarly
considered as the standard or measure of value. In England, gold

Rome all accounts appear to have been kept, and the value of all

was not considered as a legal tender for a long time after it was

38

Adam Smith
coined into money. The proportion between the values of gold
and silver money was not fixed by any public law or proclama-

something more than nominal again. If the regulated value of a
guinea, for example, was either reduced to twenty, or raised to

tion, but was left to be settled by the market. If a debtor offered
payment in gold, the creditor might either reject such payment

two-and-twenty shillings, all accounts being kept, and almost all
obligations for debt being expressed, in silver money, the greater

altogether, or accept of it at such a valuation of the gold as he and
his debtor could agree upon. Copper is not at present a legal ten-

part of payments could in either case be made with the same quantity of silver money as before; but would require very different

der, except in the change of the smaller silver coins.
In this state of things, the distinction between the metal which

quantities of gold money; a greater in the one case, and a smaller
in the other. Silver would appear to be more invariable in its value

was the standard, and that which was not the standard, was something more than a nominal distinction.

than gold. Silver would appear to measure the value of gold, and
gold would not appear to measure the value of silver. The value of

In process of time, and as people became gradually more familiar with the use of the different metals in coin, and consequently

gold would seem to depend upon the quantity of silver which it
would exchange for, and the value of silver would not seem to

better acquainted with the proportion between their respective
values, it has, in most countries, I believe, been found convenient

depend upon the quantity of gold which it would exchange for.
This difference, however, would be altogether owing to the cus-

to ascertain this proportion, and to declare by a public law, that a
guinea, for example, of such a weight and fineness, should ex-

tom of keeping accounts, and of expressing the amount of all great
and small sums rather in silver than in gold money. One of Mr

change for one-and-twenty shillings, or be a legal tender for a
debt of that amount. In this state of things, and during the con-

Drummond’s notes for five-and-twenty or fifty guineas would,
after an alteration of this kind, be still payable with five-and-twenty

tinuance of any one regulated proportion of this kind, the distinction between the metal, which is the standard, and that which is

or fifty guineas, in the same manner as before. It would, after such
an alteration, be payable with the same quantity of gold as before,

not the standard, becomes little more than a nominal distinction.
In consequence of any change, however, in this regulated pro-

but with very different quantities of silver. In the payment of such
a note, gold would appear to be more invariable in its value than

portion, this distinction becomes, or at least seems to become,

silver. Gold would appear to measure the value of silver, and silver

39

The Wealth of Nations
would not appear to measure the value of gold. If the custom of
keeping accounts, and of expressing promissory-notes and other

likely to preserve it so, as long as that order is enforced. The silver
coin still continues in the same worn and degraded state as before

obligations for money, in this manner should ever become general, gold, and not silver, would be considered as the metal which

the reformation of the cold coin. In the market, however, oneand-twenty shillings of this degraded silver coin are still consid-

was peculiarly the standard or measure of value.
In reality, during the continuance of any one regulated propor-

ered as worth a guinea of this excellent gold coin.
The reformation of the gold coin has evidently raised the value

tion between the respective values of the different metals in coin,
the value of the most precious metal regulates the value of the

of the silver coin which can be exchanged for it.
In the English mint, a pound weight of gold is coined into forty-

whole coin. Twelve copper pence contain half a pound avoirdupois of copper, of not the best quality, which, before it is coined, is

four guineas and a half, which at one-and-twenty shillings the guinea,
is equal to forty-six pounds fourteen shillings and sixpence. An ounce

seldom worth seven-pence in silver. But as, by the regulation, twelve
such pence are ordered to exchange for a shilling, they are in the

of such gold coin, therefore, is worth £ 3:17:10½ in silver. In England, no duty or seignorage is paid upon the coinage, and he who

market considered as worth a shilling, and a shilling can at any
time be had for them. Even before the late reformation of the gold

carries a pound weight or an ounce weight of standard gold bullion
to the mint, gets back a pound weight or an ounce weight of gold in

coin of Great Britain, the gold, that part of it at least which circulated in London and its neighbourhood, was in general less de-

coin, without any deduction. Three pounds seventeen shillings and
tenpence halfpenny an ounce, therefore, is said to be the mint price

graded below its standard weight than the greater part of the silver. One-and-twenty worn and defaced shillings, however, were

of gold in England, or the quantity of gold coin which the mint
gives in return for standard gold bullion.

considered as equivalent to a guinea, which, perhaps, indeed, was
worn and defaced too, but seldom so much so. The late regula-

Before the reformation of the gold coin, the price of standard
gold bullion in the market had, for many years, been upwards of

tions have brought the gold coin as near, perhaps, to its standard
weight as it is possible to bring the current coin of any nation; and

£3:18s. sometimes £ 3:19s, and very frequently £4 an ounce; that
sum, it is probable, in the worn and degraded gold coin, seldom

the order to receive no gold at the public offices but by weight, is

containing more than an ounce of standard gold. Since the refor-

40

Adam Smith
mation of the gold coin, the market price of standard gold bullion
seldom exceeds £ 3:17:7 an ounce. Before the reformation of the

sevenpence, however, seems to have been the most common price.
Since the reformation of the gold coin, the market price of stan-

gold coin, the market price was always more or less above the
mint price. Since that reformation, the market price has been con-

dard silver bullion has fallen occasionally to five shillings and
threepence, five shillings and fourpence, and five shillings and

stantly below the mint price. But that market price is the same
whether it is paid in gold or in silver coin. The late reformation of

fivepence an ounce, which last price it has scarce ever exceeded.
Though the market price of silver bullion has fallen considerably

the gold coin, therefore, has raised not only the value of the gold
coin, but likewise that of the silver coin in proportion to gold

since the reformation of the gold coin, it has not fallen so low as
the mint price.

bullion, and probably, too, in proportion to all other commodities; though the price of the greater part of other commodities

In the proportion between the different metals in the English
coin, as copper is rated very much above its real value, so silver is

being influenced by so many other causes, the rise in the value of
either gold or silver coin in proportion to them may not be so

rated somewhat below it. In the market of Europe, in the French
coin and in the Dutch coin, an ounce of fine gold exchanges for

distinct and sensible.
In the English mint, a pound weight of standard silver bullion

about fourteen ounces of fine silver. In the English coin, it exchanges
for about fifteen ounces, that is, for more silver than it is worth,

is coined into sixty-two shillings, containing, in the same manner,
a pound weight of standard silver. Five shillings and twopence an

according to the common estimation of Europe. But as the price of
copper in bars is not, even in England, raised by the high price of

ounce, therefore, is said to be the mint price of silver in England,
or the quantity of silver coin which the mint gives in return for

copper in English coin, so the price of silver in bullion is not sunk
by the low rate of silver in English coin. Silver in bullion still pre-

standard silver bullion. Before the reformation of the gold coin,
the market price of standard silver bullion was, upon different

serves its proper proportion to gold, for the same reason that copper
in bars preserves its proper proportion to silver.

occasions, five shillings and fourpence, five shillings and fivepence,
five shillings and sixpence, five shillings and sevenpence, and very

Upon the reformation of the silver coin, in the reign of William
III., the price of silver bullion still continued to be somewhat above

often five shillings and eightpence an ounce. Five shillings and

the mint price. Mr Locke imputed this high price to the permis-

41

The Wealth of Nations
sion of exporting silver bullion, and to the prohibition of exporting silver coin. This permission of exporting, he said, rendered the

ner. Some alteration in the present proportion seems to be the
only method of preventing this inconveniency.

demand for silver bullion greater than the demand for silver coin.
But the number of people who want silver coin for the common

The inconveniency, perhaps, would be less, if silver was rated in
the coin as much above its proper proportion to gold as it is at

uses of buying and selling at home, is surely much greater than
that of those who want silver bullion either for the use of exporta-

present rated below it, provided it was at the same time enacted,
that silver should not be a legal tender for more than the change of

tion or for any other use. There subsists at present a like permission of exporting gold bullion, and a like prohibition of exporting

a guinea, in the same manner as copper is not a legal tender for
more than the change of a shilling. No creditor could, in this case,

gold coin; and yet the price of gold bullion has fallen below the
mint price. But in the English coin, silver was then, in the same

be cheated in consequence of the high valuation of silver in coin;
as no creditor can at present be cheated in consequence of the

manner as now, under-rated in proportion to gold; and the gold
coin (which at that time, too, was not supposed to require any

high valuation of copper. The bankers only would suffer by this
regulation. When a run comes upon them, they sometimes en-

reformation) regulated then, as well as now, the real value of the
whole coin. As the reformation of the silver coin did not then

deavour to gain time, by paying in sixpences, and they would be
precluded by this regulation from this discreditable method of

reduce the price of silver bullion to the mint price, it is not very
probable that a like reformation will do so now.

evading immediate payment. They would be obliged, in consequence, to keep at all times in their coffers a greater quantity of

Were the silver coin brought back as near to its standard weight
as the gold, a guinea, it is probable, would, according to the present

cash than at present; and though this might, no doubt, be a considerable inconveniency to them, it would, at the same time, be a

proportion, exchange for more silver in coin than it would purchase in bullion. The silver coin containing its full standard weight,

considerable security to their creditors.
Three pounds seventeen shillings and tenpence halfpenny (the

there would in this case, be a profit in melting it down, in order,
first to sell the bullion for gold coin, and afterwards to exchange

mint price of gold) certainly does not contain, even in our present
excellent gold coin, more than an ounce of standard gold, and it

this gold coin for silver coin, to be melted down in the same man-

may be thought, therefore, should not purchase more standard

42

Adam Smith
bullion. But gold in coin is more convenient than gold in bullion;
and though, in England, the coinage is free, yet the gold which is

soon return again, of its own accord. Abroad, it could sell only for
its weight in bullion. At home, it would buy more than that weight.

carried in bullion to the mint, can seldom be returned in coin to
the owner till after a delay of several weeks. In the present hurry of

There would be a profit, therefore, in bringing it home again. In
France, a seignorage of about eight per cent. is imposed upon the

the mint, it could not be returned till after a delay of several months.
This delay is equivalent to a small duty, and renders gold in coin

coinage, and the French coin, when exported, is said to return
home again, of its own accord.

somewhat more valuable than an equal quantity of gold in bullion. If, in the English coin, silver was rated according to its proper

The occasional fluctuations in the market price of gold and silver bullion arise from the same causes as the like fluctuations in

proportion to gold, the price of silver bullion would probably fall
below the mint price, even without any reformation of the silver

that of all other commodities. The frequent loss of those metals
from various accidents by sea and by land, the continual waste of

coin; the value even of the present worn and defaced silver coin
being regulated by the value of the excellent gold coin for which it

them in gilding and plating, in lace and embroidery, in the wear
and tear of coin, and in that of plate, require, in all countries

can be changed.
A small seignorage or duty upon the coinage of both gold and

which possess no mines of their own, a continual importation, in
order to repair this loss and this waste. The merchant importers,

silver, would probably increase still more the superiority of those
metals in coin above an equal quantity of either of them in bul-

like all other merchants, we may believe, endeavour, as well as
they can, to suit their occasional importations to what they judge

lion. The coinage would, in this case, increase the value of the
metal coined in proportion to the extent of this small duty, for the

is likely to be the immediate demand. With all their attention,
however, they sometimes overdo the business, and sometimes

same reason that the fashion increases the value of plate in proportion to the price of that fashion. The superiority of coin above

underdo it. When they import more bullion than is wanted, rather
than incur the risk and trouble of exporting it again, they are some-

bullion would prevent the melting down of the coin, and would
discourage its exportation. If, upon any public exigency, it should

times willing to sell a part of it for something less than the ordinary or average price. When, on the other hand, they import less

become necessary to export the coin, the greater part of it would

than is wanted, they get something more than this price. But when,

43

The Wealth of Nations
under all those occasional fluctuations, the market price either of
gold or silver bullion continues for several years together steadily

liable to the same sort of uncertainty to which all other weights
and measures are commonly exposed. As it rarely happens that

and constantly, either more or less above, or more or less below
the mint price, we may be assured that this steady and constant,

these are exactly agreeable to their standard, the merchant adjusts
the price of his goods as well as he can, not to what those weights

either superiority or inferiority of price, is the effect of something
in the state of the coin, which, at that time, renders a certain quan-

and measures ought to be, but to what, upon an average, he finds,
by experience, they actually are. In consequence of a like disorder

tity of coin either of more value or of less value than the precise
quantity of bullion which it ought to contain. The constancy and

in the coin, the price of goods comes, in the same manner, to be
adjusted, not to the quantity of pure gold or silver which the coin

steadiness of the effect supposes a proportionable constancy and
steadiness in the cause.

ought to contain, but to that which, upon an average, it is found,
by experience, it actually does contain.

The money of any particular country is, at any particular time
and place, more or less an accurate measure or value, according as

By the money price of goods, it is to be observed, I understand
always the quantity of pure gold or silver for which they are sold,

the current coin is more or less exactly agreeable to its standard, or
contains more or less exactly the precise quantity of pure gold or

without any regard to the denomination of the coin. Six shillings
and eight pence, for example, in the time of Edward I., I consider

pure silver which it ought to contain. If in England, for example,
forty-four guineas and a half contained exactly a pound weight of

as the same money price with a pound sterling in the present times,
because it contained, as nearly as we can judge, the same quantity

standard gold, or eleven ounces of fine gold, and one ounce of
alloy, the gold coin of England would be as accurate a measure of

of pure silver.

the actual value of goods at any particular time and place as the
nature of the thing would admit. But if, by rubbing and wearing,
forty-four guineas and a half generally contain less than a pound
weight of standard gold, the diminution, however, being greater
in some pieces than in others, the measure of value comes to be

44

Adam Smith

CHAPTER VI

would be due to the time employed about it. Such talents can
seldom be acquired but in consequence of long application, and

OF THE COMPONENT PART OF THE
PRICE OF COMMODITIES

the superior value of their produce may frequently be no more
than a reasonable compensation for the time and labour which

IN THAT EARLY and rude state of society which precedes both the

must be spent in acquiring them. In the advanced state of society,
allowances of this kind, for superior hardship and superior skill,

accumulation of stock and the appropriation of land, the proportion between the quantities of labour necessary for acquiring dif-

are commonly made in the wages of labour; and something of the
same kind must probably have taken place in its earliest and rud-

ferent objects, seems to be the only circumstance which can afford
any rule for exchanging them for one another. If among a nation

est period.
In this state of things, the whole produce of labour belongs to

of hunters, for example, it usually costs twice the labour to kill a
beaver which it does to kill a deer, one beaver should naturally

the labourer; and the quantity of labour commonly employed in
acquiring or producing any commodity, is the only circumstance

exchange for or be worth two deer. It is natural that what is usually the produce of two days or two hours labour, should be worth

which can regulate the quantity of labour which it ought commonly to purchase, command, or exchange for.

double of what is usually the produce of one day’s or one hour’s
labour.

As soon as stock has accumulated in the hands of particular
persons, some of them will naturally employ it in setting to work

If the one species of labour should be more severe than the other,
some allowance will naturally be made for this superior hardship;

industrious people, whom they will supply with materials and
subsistence, in order to make a profit by the sale of their work, or

and the produce of one hour’s labour in the one way may frequently exchange for that of two hour’s labour in the other.

by what their labour adds to the value of the materials. In exchanging the complete manufacture either for money, for labour,

Or if the one species of labour requires an uncommon degree of
dexterity and ingenuity, the esteem which men have for such tal-

or for other goods, over and above what may be sufficient to pay
the price of the materials, and the wages of the workmen, some-

ents, will naturally give a value to their produce, superior to what

thing must be given for the profits of the undertaker of the work,

45

The Wealth of Nations
who hazards his stock in this adventure. The value which the workmen add to the materials, therefore, resolves itself in this case into

seven hundred pounds, while the finer materials in the other cost
seven thousand. The capital annually employed in the one will, in

two parts, of which the one pays their wages, the other the profits of
their employer upon the whole stock of materials and wages which

this case, amount only to one thousand pounds; whereas that employed in the other will amount to seven thousand three hundred

he advanced. He could have no interest to employ them, unless he
expected from the sale of their work something more than what was

pounds. At the rate of ten per cent. therefore, the undertaker of
the one will expect a yearly profit of about one hundred pounds

sufficient to replace his stock to him; and he could have no interest
to employ a great stock rather than a small one, unless his profits

only; while that of the other will expect about seven hundred and
thirty pounds. But though their profits are so very different, their

were to bear some proportion to the extent of his stock.
The profits of stock, it may perhaps be thought, are only a dif-

labour of inspection and direction may be either altogether or
very nearly the same. In many great works, almost the whole labour

ferent name for the wages of a particular sort of labour, the labour
of inspection and direction. They are, however, altogether differ-

of this kind is committed to some principal clerk. His wages properly express the value of this labour of inspection and direction.

ent, are regulated by quite different principles, and bear no proportion to the quantity, the hardship, or the ingenuity of this sup-

Though in settling them some regard is had commonly, not only
to his labour and skill, but to the trust which is reposed in him,

posed labour of inspection and direction. They are regulated altogether by the value of the stock employed, and are greater or smaller

yet they never bear any regular proportion to the capital of which
he oversees the management; and the owner of this capital, though

in proportion to the extent of this stock. Let us suppose, for example, that in some particular place, where the common annual

he is thus discharged of almost all labour, still expects that his
profit should bear a regular proportion to his capital. In the price

profits of manufacturing stock are ten per cent. there are two different manufactures, in each of which twenty workmen are em-

of commodities, therefore, the profits of stock constitute a component part altogether different from the wages of labour, and

ployed, at the rate of fifteen pounds a year each, or at the expense
of three hundred a-year in each manufactory. Let us suppose, too,

regulated by quite different principles.
In this state of things, the whole produce of labour does not

that the coarse materials annually wrought up in the one cost only

always belong to the labourer. He must in most cases share it with

46

Adam Smith
the owner of the stock which employs him. Neither is the quantity of labour commonly employed in acquiring or producing any

labour, but of that which resolves itself into rent, and of that which
resolves itself into profit.

commodity, the only circumstance which can regulate the quantity which it ought commonly to purchase, command or exchange

In every society, the price of every commodity finally resolves
itself into some one or other, or all of those three parts; and in

for. An additional quantity, it is evident, must be due for the profits of the stock which advanced the wages and furnished the mate-

every improved society, all the three enter, more or less, as component parts, into the price of the far greater part of commodities.

rials of that labour.
As soon as the land of any country has all become private prop-

In the price of corn, for example, one part pays the rent of the
landlord, another pays the wages or maintenance of the labourers

erty, the landlords, like all other men, love to reap where they
never sowed, and demand a rent even for its natural produce. The

and labouring cattle employed in producing it, and the third pays
the profit of the farmer. These three parts seem either immedi-

wood of the forest, the grass of the field, and all the natural fruits
of the earth, which, when land was in common, cost the labourer

ately or ultimately to make up the whole price of corn. A fourth
part, it may perhaps be thought is necessary for replacing the stock

only the trouble of gathering them, come, even to him, to have an
additional price fixed upon them. He must then pay for the li-

of the farmer, or for compensating the wear and tear of his labouring
cattle, and other instruments of husbandry. But it must be con-

cence to gather them, and must give up to the landlord a portion
of what his labour either collects or produces. This portion, or,

sidered, that the price of any instrument of husbandry, such as a
labouring horse, is itself made up of the same time parts; the rent

what comes to the same thing, the price of this portion, constitutes the rent of land, and in the price of the greater part of com-

of the land upon which he is reared, the labour of tending and
rearing him, and the profits of the farmer, who advances both the

modities, makes a third component part.
The real value of all the different component parts of price, it

rent of this land, and the wages of this labour. Though the price of
the corn, therefore, may pay the price as well as the maintenance

must be observed, is measured by the quantity of labour which
they can, each of them, purchase or command. Labour measures

of the horse, the whole price still resolves itself, either immediately
or ultimately, into the same three parts of rent, labour, and profit.

the value, not only of that part of price which resolves itself into

In the price of flour or meal, we must add to the price of the

47

The Wealth of Nations
corn, the profits of the miller, and the wages of his servants; in the
price of bread, the profits of the baker, and the wages of his ser-

the wages of labour, and the profits of stock; and a still smaller
number, in which it consists altogether in the wages of labour. In

vants; and in the price of both, the labour of transporting the corn
from the house of the farmer to that of the miller, and from that

the price of sea-fish, for example, one part pays the labour of the
fisherman, and the other the profits of the capital employed in the

of the miller to that of the baker, together with the profits of those
who advance the wages of that labour.

fishery. Rent very seldom makes any part of it, though it does
sometimes, as I shall shew hereafter. It is otherwise, at least through

The price of flax resolves itself into the same three parts as that
of corn. In the price of linen we must add to this price the wages

the greater part of Europe, in river fisheries. A salmon fishery pays
a rent; and rent, though it cannot well be called the rent of land,

of the flax-dresser, of the spinner, of the weaver, of the bleacher,
etc. together with the profits of their respective employers.

makes a part of the price of a salmon, as well as wares and profit.
In some parts of Scotland, a few poor people make a trade of

As any particular commodity comes to be more manufactured,
that part of the price which resolves itself into wages and profit,

gathering, along the sea-shore, those little variegated stones commonly known by the name of Scotch pebbles. The price which is

comes to be greater in proportion to that which resolves itself into
rent. In the progress of the manufacture, not only the number of

paid to them by the stone-cutter, is altogether the wages of their
labour; neither rent nor profit makes an part of it.

profits increase, but every subsequent profit is greater than the
foregoing; because the capital from which it is derived must al-

But the whole price of any commodity must still finally resolve
itself into some one or other or all of those three parts; as whatever

ways be greater. The capital which employs the weavers, for example, must be greater than that which employs the spinners; be-

part of it remains after paying the rent of the land, and the price of
the whole labour employed in raising, manufacturing, and bring-

cause it not only replaces that capital with its profits, but pays,
besides, the wages of the weavers: and the profits must always bear

ing it to market, must necessarily be profit to somebody.
As the price or exchangeable value of every particular commod-

some proportion to the capital.
In the most improved societies, however, there are always a few

ity, taken separately, resolves itself into some one or other, or all of
those three parts; so that of all the commodities which compose

commodities of which the price resolves itself into two parts only

the whole annual produce of the labour of every country, taken

48

Adam Smith
complexly, must resolve itself into the same three parts, and be
parcelled out among different inhabitants of the country, either as

use of the money, must be paid from some other source of revenue, unless perhaps the borrower is a spendthrift, who contracts

the wages of their labour, the profits of their stock, or the rent of
their land. The whole of what is annually either collected or pro-

a second debt in order to pay the interest of the first. The revenue
which proceeds altogether from land, is called rent, and belongs

duced by the labour of every society, or, what comes to the same
thing, the whole price of it, is in this manner originally distrib-

to the landlord. The revenue of the farmer is derived partly from
his labour, and partly from his stock. To him, land is only the

uted among some of its different members. Wages, profit, and
rent, are the three original sources of all revenue, as well as of all

instrument which enables him to earn the wages of this labour,
and to make the profits of this stock. All taxes, and all the revenue

exchangeable value. All other revenue is ultimately derived from
some one or other of these.

which is founded upon them, all salaries, pensions, and annuities
of every kind, are ultimately derived from some one or other of

Whoever derives his revenue from a fund which is his own, must
draw it either from his labour, from his stock, or from his land.

those three original sources of revenue, and are paid either immediately or mediately from the wages of labour, the profits of stock,

The revenue derived from labour is called wages; that derived from
stock, by the person who manages or employs it, is called profit;

or the rent of land.
When those three different sorts of revenue belong to different

that derived from it by the person who does not employ it himself, but lends it to another, is called the interest or the use of

persons, they are readily distinguished; but when they belong to
the same, they are sometimes confounded with one another, at

money. It is the compensation which the borrower pays to the
lender, for the profit which he has an opportunity of making by

least in common language.
A gentleman who farms a part of his own estate, after paying

the use of the money. Part of that profit naturally belongs to the
borrower, who runs the risk and takes the trouble of employing it,

the expense of cultivation, should gain both the rent of the landlord and the profit of the farmer. He is apt to denominate, how-

and part to the lender, who affords him the opportunity of making this profit. The interest of money is always a derivative rev-

ever, his whole gain, profit, and thus confounds rent with profit,
at least in common language. The greater part of our North Ameri-

enue, which, if it is not paid from the profit which is made by the

can and West Indian planters are in this situation. They farm, the

49

The Wealth of Nations
greater part of them, their own estates: and accordingly we seldom hear of the rent of a plantation, but frequently of its profit.

the rent of the first, the profit of the second, and the wages of the
third. The whole, however, is commonly considered as the earn-

Common farmers seldom employ any overseer to direct the general operations of the farm. They generally, too, work a good deal

ings of his labour. Both rent and profit are, in this case, confounded
with wages.

with their own hands, as ploughmen, harrowers, etc. What remains of the crop, after paying the rent, therefore, should not

As in a civilized country there are but few commodities of which
the exchangeable value arises from labour only, rent and profit

only replace to them their stock employed in cultivation, together
with its ordinary profits, but pay them the wages which are due to

contributing largely to that of the far greater part of them, so the
annual produce of its labour will always be sufficient to purchase

them, both as labourers and overseers. Whatever remains, however, after paying the rent and keeping up the stock, is called profit.

or command a much greater quantity of labour than what was
employed in raising, preparing, and bringing that produce to

But wages evidently make a part of it. The farmer, by saving these
wages, must necessarily gain them. Wages, therefore, are in this

market. If the society were annually to employ all the labour which
it can annually purchase, as the quantity of labour would increase

case confounded with profit.
An independent manufacturer, who has stock enough both to

greatly every year, so the produce of every succeeding year would
be of vastly greater value than that of the foregoing. But there is

purchase materials, and to maintain himself till he can carry his
work to market, should gain both the wages of a journeyman who

no country in which the whole annual produce is employed in
maintaining the industrious. The idle everywhere consume a great

works under a master, and the profit which that master makes by
the sale of that journeyman’s work. His whole gains, however, are

part of it; and, according to the different proportions in which it
is annually divided between those two different orders of people,

commonly called profit, and wages are, in this case, too, confounded with profit.

its ordinary or average value must either annually increase or diminish, or continue the same from one year to another.

A gardener who cultivates his own garden with his own hands,
unites in his own person the three different characters, of landlord, farmer, and labourer. His produce, therefore, should pay him

50

Adam Smith

CHAPTER VII

commodity is then sold for what may be called its natural price.
The commodity is then sold precisely for what it is worth, or for

OF THE NATURAL AND MARKET PRICE
OF COMMODITIES

what it really costs the person who brings it to market; for though,
in common language, what is called the prime cost of any com-

THERE IS IN EVERY SOCIETY or neighbourhood an ordinary or aver-

modity does not comprehend the profit of the person who is to sell
it again, yet, if he sells it at a price which does not allow him the

age rate, both of wages and profit, in every different employment
of labour and stock. This rate is naturally regulated, as I shall shew

ordinary rate of profit in his neighbourhood, he is evidently a loser
by the trade; since, by employing his stock in some other way, he

hereafter, partly by the general circumstances of the society, their
riches or poverty, their advancing, stationary, or declining condi-

might have made that profit. His profit, besides, is his revenue, the
proper fund of his subsistence. As, while he is preparing and bring-

tion, and partly by the particular nature of each employment.
There is likewise in every society or neighbourhood an ordinary

ing the goods to market, he advances to his workmen their wages,
or their subsistence; so he advances to himself, in the same manner,

or average rate of rent, which is regulated, too, as I shall shew
hereafter, partly by the general circumstances of the society or

his own subsistence, which is generally suitable to the profit which
he may reasonably expect from the sale of his goods. Unless they

neighbourhood in which the land is situated, and partly by the
natural or improved fertility of the land.

yield him this profit, therefore, they do not repay him what they
may very properly be said to have really cost him.

These ordinary or average rates may be called the natural rates
of wages, profit and rent, at the time and place in which they

Though the price, therefore, which leaves him this profit, is not
always the lowest at which a dealer may sometimes sell his goods,

commonly prevail.
When the price of any commodity is neither more nor less than

it is the lowest at which he is likely to sell them for any considerable time; at least where there is perfect liberty, or where he may

what is sufficient to pay the rent of the land, the wages of the
labour, and the profits of the stock employed in raising, prepar-

change his trade as often as he pleases.
The actual price at which any commodity is commonly sold, is

ing, and bringing it to market, according to their natural rates, the

called its market price. It may either be above, or below, or exactly

51

The Wealth of Nations
the same with its natural price.
The market price of every particular commodity is regulated by

Among competitors of equal wealth and luxury, the same deficiency
will generally occasion a more or less eager competition, according

the proportion between the quantity which is actually brought to
market, and the demand of those who are willing to pay the natu-

as the acquisition of the commodity happens to be of more or less
importance to them. Hence the exorbitant price of the necessaries

ral price of the commodity, or the whole value of the rent, labour,
and profit, which must be paid in order to bring it thither. Such

of life during the blockade of a town, or in a famine.
When the quantity brought to market exceeds the effectual de-

people may be called the effectual demanders, and their demand
the effectual demand; since it maybe sufficient to effectuate the

mand, it cannot be all sold to those who are willing to pay the
whole value of the rent, wages, and profit, which must be paid in

bringing of the commodity to market. It is different from the absolute demand. A very poor man may be said, in some sense, to

order to bring it thither. Some part must be sold to those who are
willing to pay less, and the low price which they give for it must

have a demand for a coach and six; he might like to have it; but his
demand is not an effectual demand, as the commodity can never

reduce the price of the whole. The market price will sink more or
less below the natural price, according as the greatness of the ex-

be brought to market in order to satisfy it.
When the quantity of any commodity which is brought to mar-

cess increases more or less the competition of the sellers, or according as it happens to be more or less important to them to get

ket falls short of the effectual demand, all those who are willing to
pay the whole value of the rent, wages, and profit, which must be

immediately rid of the commodity. The same excess in the importation of perishable, will occasion a much greater competition than

paid in order to bring it thither, cannot be supplied with the quantity which they want. Rather than want it altogether, some of them

in that of durable commodities; in the importation of oranges, for
example, than in that of old iron.

will be willing to give more. A competition will immediately begin among them, and the market price will rise more or less above

When the quantity brought to market is just sufficient to supply the effectual demand, and no more, the market price naturally

the natural price, according as either the greatness of the deficiency, or the wealth and wanton luxury of the competitors, hap-

comes to be either exactly, or as nearly as can be judged of, the
same with the natural price. The whole quantity upon hand can

pen to animate more or less the eagerness of the competition.

be disposed of for this price, and can not be disposed of for more.

52

Adam Smith
The competition of the different dealers obliges them all to accept
of this price, but does not oblige them to accept of less.

wages or profit, the interest of all other labourers and dealers will
soon prompt them to employ more labour and stock in preparing

The quantity of every commodity brought to market naturally
suits itself to the effectual demand. It is the interest of all those

and bringing it to market. The quantity brought thither will soon
be sufficient to supply the effectual demand. All the different parts

who employ their land, labour, or stock, in bringing any commodity to market, that the quantity never should exceed the effec-

of its price will soon sink to their natural rate, and the whole price
to its natural price.

tual demand; and it is the interest of all other people that it never
should fall short of that demand.

The natural price, therefore, is, as it were, the central price, to
which the prices of all commodities are continually gravitating.

If at any time it exceeds the effectual demand, some of the component parts of its price must be paid below their natural rate. If it

Different accidents may sometimes keep them suspended a good
deal above it, and sometimes force them down even somewhat

is rent, the interest of the landlords will immediately prompt them
to withdraw a part of their land; and if it is wages or profit, the

below it. But whatever may be the obstacles which hinder them
from settling in this centre of repose and continuance, they are

interest of the labourers in the one case, and of their employers in
the other, will prompt them to withdraw a part of their labour or

constantly tending towards it.
The whole quantity of industry annually employed in order to

stock, from this employment. The quantity brought to market
will soon be no more than sufficient to supply the effectual de-

bring any commodity to market, naturally suits itself in this manner to the effectual demand. It naturally aims at bringing always

mand. All the different parts of its price will rise to their natural
rate, and the whole price to its natural price.

that precise quantity thither which may be sufficient to supply,
and no more than supply, that demand.

If, on the contrary, the quantity brought to market should at
any time fall short of the effectual demand, some of the compo-

But, in some employments, the same quantity of industry will,
in different years, produce very different quantities of commodi-

nent parts of its price must rise above their natural rate. If it is
rent, the interest of all other landlords will naturally prompt them

ties; while, in others, it will produce always the same, or very nearly
the same. The same number of labourers in husbandry will, in

to prepare more land for the raising of this commodity; if it is

different years, produce very different quantities of corn, wine,

53

The Wealth of Nations
oil, hops, etc. But the same number of spinners or weavers will
every year produce the same, or very nearly the same, quantity of

more frequent, variations in the quantity of what is brought to
market, in order to supply that demand.

linen and woollen cloth. It is only the average produce of the one
species of industry which can be suited, in any respect, to the

The occasional and temporary fluctuations in the market price
of any commodity fall chiefly upon those parts of its price which

effectual demand; and as its actual produce is frequently much
greater, and frequently much less, than its average produce, the

resolve themselves into wages and profit. That part which resolves
itself into rent is less affected by them. A rent certain in money is

quantity of the commodities brought to market will sometimes
exceed a good deal, and sometimes fall short a good deal, of the

not in the least affected by them, either in its rate or in its value. A
rent which consists either in a certain proportion, or in a certain

effectual demand. Even though that demand, therefore, should
continue always the same, their market price will be liable to great

quantity, of the rude produce, is no doubt affected in its yearly
value by all the occasional and temporary fluctuations in the mar-

fluctuations, will sometimes fall a good deal below, and sometimes rise a good deal above, their natural price. In the other spe-

ket price of that rude produce; but it is seldom affected by them in
its yearly rate. In settling the terms of the lease, the landlord and

cies of industry, the produce of equal quantities of labour being
always the same, or very nearly the same, it can be more exactly

farmer endeavour, according to their best judgment, to adjust that
rate, not to the temporary and occasional, but to the average and

suited to the effectual demand. While that demand continues the
same, therefore, the market price of the commodities is likely to

ordinary price of the produce.
Such fluctuations affect both the value and the rate, either of

do so too, and to be either altogether, or as nearly as can be judged
of, the same with the natural price. That the price of linen and

wages or of profit, according as the market happens to be either
overstocked or understocked with commodities or with labour,

woollen cloth is liable neither to such frequent, nor to such great
variations, as the price of corn, every man’s experience will inform

with work done, or with work to be done. A public mourning
raises the price of black cloth ( with which the market is almost

him. The price of the one species of commodities varies only with
the variations in the demand; that of the other varies not only

always understocked upon such occasions), and augments the profits of the merchants who possess any considerable quantity of it. It

with the variations in the demand, but with the much greater, and

has no effect upon the wages of the weavers. The market is

54

Adam Smith
understocked with commodities, not with labour, with work done,
not with work to be done. It raises the wages of journeymen tailors.

the natural price, and, perhaps, for some time even below it. If the
market is at a great distance from the residence of those who sup-

The market is here understocked with labour. There is an effectual
demand for more labour, for more work to be done, than can be

ply it, they may sometimes be able to keep the secret for several
years together, and may so long enjoy their extraordinary profits

had. It sinks the price of coloured silks and cloths, and thereby reduces the profits of the merchants who have any considerable quan-

without any new rivals. Secrets of this kind, however, it must be
acknowledged, can seldom be long kept; and the extraordinary

tity of them upon hand. It sinks, too, the wages of the workmen
employed in preparing such commodities, for which all demand is

profit can last very little longer than they are kept.
Secrets in manufactures are capable of being longer kept than

stopped for six months, perhaps for a twelvemonth. The market is
here overstocked both with commodities and with labour.

secrets in trade. A dyer who has found the means of producing a
particular colour with materials which cost only half the price of

But though the market price of every particular commodity is
in this manner continually gravitating, if one may say so, towards

those commonly made use of, may, with good management, enjoy the advantage of his discovery as long as he lives, and even

the natural price; yet sometimes particular accidents, sometimes
natural causes, and sometimes particular regulations of policy, may,

leave it as a legacy to his posterity. His extraordinary gains arise
from the high price which is paid for his private labour. They

in many commodities, keep up the market price, for a long time
together, a good deal above the natural price.

properly consist in the high wages of that labour. But as they are
repeated upon every part of his stock, and as their whole amount

When, by an increase in the effectual demand, the market price
of some particular commodity happens to rise a good deal above

bears, upon that account, a regular proportion to it, they are commonly considered as extraordinary profits of stock.

the natural price, those who employ their stocks in supplying that
market, are generally careful to conceal this change. If it was com-

Such enhancements of the market price are evidently the effects
of particular accidents, of which, however, the operation may some-

monly known, their great profit would tempt so many new rivals
to employ their stocks in the same way, that, the effectual demand

times last for many years together.
Some natural productions require such a singularity of soil and

being fully supplied, the market price would soon be reduced to

situation, that all the land in a great country, which is fit for pro-

55

The Wealth of Nations
ducing them, may not be sufficient to supply the effectual demand. The whole quantity brought to market, therefore, may be

pany, has the same effect as a secret in trade or manufactures. The
monopolists, by keeping the market constantly understocked by

disposed of to those who are willing to give more than what is
sufficient to pay the rent of the land which produced them, to-

never fully supplying the effectual demand, sell their commodities much above the natural price, and raise their emoluments,

gether with the wages of the labour and the profits of the stock
which were employed in preparing and bringing them to market,

whether they consist in wages or profit, greatly above their natural
rate.

according to their natural rates. Such commodities may continue
for whole centuries together to be sold at this high price; and that

The price of monopoly is upon every occasion the highest which
can be got. The natural price, or the price of free competition, on

part of it which resolves itself into the rent of land, is in this case
the part which is generally paid above its natural rate. The rent of

the contrary, is the lowest which can be taken, not upon every
occasion indeed, but for any considerable time together. The one

the land which affords such singular and esteemed productions,
like the rent of some vineyards in France of a peculiarly happy soil

is upon every occasion the highest which can be squeezed out of
the buyers, or which it is supposed they will consent to give; the

and situation, bears no regular proportion to the rent of other
equally fertile and equally well cultivated land in its neighbourhood.

other is the lowest which the sellers can commonly afford to take,
and at the same time continue their business.

The wages of the labour, and the profits of the stock employed in
bringing such commodities to market, on the contrary, are sel-

The exclusive privileges of corporations, statutes of apprenticeship, and all those laws which restrain in particular employments,

dom out of their natural proportion to those of the other employments of labour and stock in their neighbourhood.

the competition to a smaller number than might otherwise go
into them, have the same tendency, though in a less degree. They

Such enhancements of the market price are evidently the effect
of natural causes, which may hinder the effectual demand from

are a sort of enlarged monopolies, and may frequently, for ages
together, and in whole classes of employments, keep up the mar-

ever being fully supplied, and which may continue, therefore, to
operate for ever.

ket price of particular commodities above the natural price, and
maintain both the wages of the labour and the profits of the stock

A monopoly granted either to an individual or to a trading com-

employed about them somewhat above their natural rate.

56

Adam Smith
Such enhancements of the market price may last as long as the
regulations of policy which give occasion to them.

ness in the time of its prosperity. When they are gone, the number
of those who are afterwards educated to the trade will naturally

The market price of any particular commodity, though it may
continue long above, can seldom continue long below, its natural

suit itself to the effectual demand. The policy must be as violent as
that of Indostan or ancient Egypt (where every man was bound by

price. Whatever part of it was paid below the natural rate, the
persons whose interest it affected would immediately feel the loss,

a principle of religion to follow the occupation of his father, and
was supposed to commit the most horrid sacrilege if he changed it

and would immediately withdraw either so much land or no much
labour, or so much stock, from being employed about it, that the

for another), which can in any particular employment, and for
several generations together, sink either the wages of labour or the

quantity brought to market would soon be no more than sufficient to supply the effectual demand. Its market price, therefore,

profits of stock below their natural rate.
This is all that I think necessary to be observed at present con-

would soon rise to the natural price; this at least would be the case
where there was perfect liberty.

cerning the deviations, whether occasional or permanent, of the
market price of commodities from the natural price.

The same statutes of apprenticeship and other corporation laws,
indeed, which, when a manufacture is in prosperity, enable the

The natural price itself varies with the natural rate of each of its
component parts, of wages, profit, and rent; and in every society

workman to raise his wages a good deal above their natural rate,
sometimes oblige him, when it decays, to let them down a good

this rate varies according to their circumstances, according to their
riches or poverty, their advancing, stationary, or declining condi-

deal below it. As in the one case they exclude many people from
his employment, so in the other they exclude him from many

tion. I shall, in the four following chapters, endeavour to explain,
as fully and distinctly as I can, the causes of those different varia-

employments. The effect of such regulations, however, is not near
so durable in sinking the workman’s wages below, as in raising

tions.
First, I shall endeavour to explain what are the circumstances

them above their natural rate. Their operation in the one way may
endure for many centuries, but in the other it can last no longer

which naturally determine the rate of wages, and in what manner
those circumstances are affected by the riches or poverty, by the

than the lives of some of the workmen who were bred to the busi-

advancing, stationary, or declining state of the society.

57

The Wealth of Nations
Secondly, I shall endeavour to shew what are the circumstances
which naturally determine the rate of profit; and in what manner,

CHAPTER VIII

too, those circumstances are affected by the like variations in the
state of the society.

OF THE WAGES OF LABOUR

Though pecuniary wages and profit are very different in the
different employments of labour and stock; yet a certain propor-

THE PRODUCE OF LABOUR constitutes the natural recompence or
wages of labour

tion seems commonly to take place between both the pecuniary
wages in all the different employments of labour, and the pecuni-

In that original state of things which precedes both the appropriation of land and the accumulation of stock, the whole pro-

ary profits in all the different employments of stock. This proportion, it will appear hereafter, depends partly upon the nature of

duce of labour belongs to the labourer. He has neither landlord
nor master to share with him.

the different employments, and partly upon the different laws and
policy of the society in which they are carried on. But though in

Had this state continued, the wages of labour would have augmented with all those improvements in its productive powers, to

many respects dependent upon the laws and policy, this proportion seems to be little affected by the riches or poverty of that

which the division of labour gives occasion. All things would gradually have become cheaper. They would have been produced by a

society, by its advancing, stationary, or declining condition, but to
remain the same, or very nearly the same, in all those different

smaller quantity of labour; and as the commodities produced by
equal quantities of labour would naturally in this state of things

states. I shall, in the third place, endeavour to explain all the different circumstances which regulate this proportion.

be exchanged for one another, they would have been purchased
likewise with the produce of a smaller quantity.

In the fourth and last place, I shall endeavour to shew what are
the circumstances which regulate the rent of land, and which ei-

But though all things would have become cheaper in reality, in
appearance many things might have become dearer, than before,

ther raise or lower the real price of all the different substances
which it produces.

or have been exchanged for a greater quantity of other goods. Let
us suppose, for example, that in the greater part of employments
the productive powers of labour had been improved to tenfold, or

58

Adam Smith
that a day’s labour could produce ten times the quantity of work
which it had done originally; but that in a particular employment

raise or collect from it. His rent makes the first deduction from
the produce of the labour which is employed upon land.

they had been improved only to double, or that a day’s labour
could produce only twice the quantity of work which it had done

It seldom happens that the person who tills the ground has wherewithal to maintain himself till he reaps the harvest. His mainte-

before. In exchanging the produce of a day’s labour in the greater
part of employments for that of a day’s labour in this particular

nance is generally advanced to him from the stock of a master, the
farmer who employs him, and who would have no interest to

one, ten times the original quantity of work in them would purchase only twice the original quantity in it. Any particular quan-

employ him, unless he was to share in the produce of his labour,
or unless his stock was to be replaced to him with a profit. This

tity in it, therefore, a pound weight, for example, would appear to
be five times dearer than before. In reality, however, it would be

profit makes a second deduction from the produce of the labour
which is employed upon land.

twice as cheap. Though it required five times the quantity of other
goods to purchase it, it would require only half the quantity of

The produce of almost all other labour is liable to the like deduction of profit. In all arts and manufactures, the greater part of

labour either to purchase or to produce it. The acquisition, therefore, would be twice as easy as before.

the workmen stand in need of a master, to advance them the materials of their work, and their wages and maintenance, till it be

But this original state of things, in which the labourer enjoyed
the whole produce of his own labour, could not last beyond the

completed. He shares in the produce of their labour, or in the
value which it adds to the materials upon which it is bestowed;

first introduction of the appropriation of land and the accumulation of stock. It was at an end, therefore, long before the most

and in this share consists his profit.
It sometimes happens, indeed, that a single independent work-

considerable improvements were made in the productive powers
of labour; and it would be to no purpose to trace further what

man has stock sufficient both to purchase the materials of his work,
and to maintain himself till it be completed. He is both master

might have been its effects upon the recompence or wages of labour.
As soon as land becomes private property, the landlord demands

and workman, and enjoys the whole produce of his own labour,
or the whole value which it adds to the materials upon which it is

a share of almost all the produce which the labourer can either

bestowed. It includes what are usually two distinct revenues, be-

59

The Wealth of Nations
longing to two distinct persons, the profits of stock, and the wages
of labour.

workman, could generally live a year or two upon the stocks, which
they have already acquired. Many workmen could not subsist a

Such cases, however, are not very frequent; and in every part of
Europe twenty workmen serve under a master for one that is inde-

week, few could subsist a month, and scarce any a year, without
employment. In the long run, the workman may be as necessary

pendent, and the wages of labour are everywhere understood to
be, what they usually are, when the labourer is one person, and

to his master as his master is to him; but the necessity is not so
immediate.

the owner of the stock which employs him another.
What are the common wages of labour, depends everywhere

We rarely hear, it has been said, of the combinations of masters,
though frequently of those of workmen. But whoever imagines,

upon the contract usually made between those two parties, whose
interests are by no means the same. The workmen desire to get as

upon this account, that masters rarely combine, is as ignorant of
the world as of the subject. Masters are always and everywhere in

much, the masters to give as little, as possible. The former are
disposed to combine in order to raise, the latter in order to lower,

a sort of tacit, but constant and uniform, combination, not to
raise the wages of labour above their actual rate. To violate this

the wages of labour.
It is not, however, difficult to foresee which of the two parties

combination is everywhere a most unpopular action, and a sort of
reproach to a master among his neighbours and equals. We sel-

must, upon all ordinary occasions, have the advantage in the dispute, and force the other into a compliance with their terms. The

dom, indeed, hear of this combination, because it is the usual,
and, one may say, the natural state of things, which nobody ever

masters, being fewer in number, can combine much more easily:
and the law, besides, authorises, or at least does not prohibit, their

hears of. Masters, too, sometimes enter into particular combinations to sink the wages of labour even below this rate. These are

combinations, while it prohibits those of the workmen. We have
no acts of parliament against combining to lower the price of work,

always conducted with the utmost silence and secrecy till the moment of execution; and when the workmen yield, as they some-

but many against combining to raise it. In all such disputes, the
masters can hold out much longer. A landlord, a farmer, a master

times do without resistance, though severely felt by them, they are
never heard of by other people. Such combinations, however, are

manufacturer, or merchant, though they did not employ a single

frequently resisted by a contrary defensive combination of the

60

Adam Smith
workmen, who sometimes, too, without any provocation of this
kind, combine, of their own accord, to raise tile price of their

But though, in disputes with their workmen, masters must generally have the advantage, there is, however, a certain rate, below

labour. Their usual pretences are, sometimes the high price of provisions, sometimes the great profit which their masters make by

which it seems impossible to reduce, for any considerable time,
the ordinary wages even of the lowest species of labour.

their work. But whether their combinations be offensive or defensive, they are always abundantly heard of. In order to bring the

A man must always live by his work, and his wages must at least
be sufficient to maintain him. They must even upon most occa-

point to a speedy decision, they have always recourse to the loudest clamour, and sometimes to the most shocking violence and

sions be somewhat more, otherwise it would be impossible for
him to bring up a family, and the race of such workmen could not

outrage. They are desperate, and act with the folly and extravagance of desperate men, who must either starve, or frighten their

last beyond the first generation. Mr Cantillon seems, upon this
account, to suppose that the lowest species of common labourers

masters into an immediate compliance with their demands. The
masters, upon these occasions, are just as clamorous upon the other

must everywhere earn at least double their own maintenance, in
order that, one with another, they may be enabled to bring up two

side, and never cease to call aloud for the assistance of the civil
magistrate, and the rigorous execution of those laws which have

children; the labour of the wife, on account of her necessary attendance on the children, being supposed no more than sufficient

been enacted with so much severity against the combination of
servants, labourers, and journeymen. The workmen, accordingly,

to provide for herself: But one half the children born, it is computed, die before the age of manhood. The poorest labourers, there-

very seldom derive any advantage from the violence of those tumultuous combinations, which, partly from the interposition of

fore, according to this account, must, one with another, attempt
to rear at least four children, in order that two may have an equal

the civil magistrate, partly from the superior steadiness of the
masters, partly from the necessity which the greater part of the

chance of living to that age. But the necessary maintenance of
four children, it is supposed, may be nearly equal to that of one

workmen are under of submitting for the sake of present subsistence, generally end in nothing but the punishment or ruin of the

man. The labour of an able-bodied slave, the same author adds, is
computed to be worth double his maintenance; and that of the

ringleaders.

meanest labourer, he thinks, cannot be worth less than that of an

61

The Wealth of Nations
able-bodied slave. Thus far at least seems certain, that, in order to
bring up a family, the labour of the husband and wife together

what is necessary for the employment of their masters.
When the landlord, annuitant, or monied man, has a greater

must, even in the lowest species of common labour, be able to
earn something more than what is precisely necessary for their

revenue than what he judges sufficient to maintain his own family, he employs either the whole or a part of the surplus in main-

own maintenance; but in what proportion, whether in that abovementioned, or many other, I shall not take upon me to determine.

taining one or more menial servants. Increase this surplus, and he
will naturally increase the number of those servants.

There are certain circumstances, however, which sometimes give
the labourers an advantage, and enable them to raise their wages

When an independent workman, such as a weaver or shoemaker,
has got more stock than what is sufficient to purchase the materi-

considerably above this rate, evidently the lowest which is consistent with common humanity.

als of his own work, and to maintain himself till he can dispose of
it, he naturally employs one or more journeymen with the sur-

When in any country the demand for those who live by wages,
labourers, journeymen, servants of every kind, is continually in-

plus, in order to make a profit by their work. Increase this surplus,
and he will naturally increase the number of his journeymen.

creasing; when every year furnishes employment for a greater number than had been employed the year before, the workmen have

The demand for those who live by wages, therefore, necessarily
increases with the increase of the revenue and stock of every coun-

no occasion to combine in order to raise their wages. The scarcity
of hands occasions a competition among masters, who bid against

try, and cannot possibly increase without it. The increase of revenue
and stock is the increase of national wealth. The demand for those

one another in order to get workmen, and thus voluntarily break
through the natural combination of masters not to raise wages.

who live by wages, therefore, naturally increases with the increase of
national wealth, and cannot possibly increase without it.

The demand for those who live by wages, it is evident, cannot
increase but in proportion to the increase of the funds which are

It is not the actual greatness of national wealth, but its continual increase, which occasions a rise in the wages of labour. It is

destined to the payment of wages. These funds are of two kinds,
first, the revenue which is over and above what is necessary for the

not, accordingly, in the richest countries, but in the most thriving,
or in those which are growing rich the fastest, that the wages of

maintenance; and, secondly, the stock which is over and above

labour are highest. England is certainly, in the present times, a

62

Adam Smith
much richer country than any part of North America. The wages
of labour, however, are much higher in North America than in

prosperity of any country is the increase of the number of its inhabitants. In Great Britain, and most other European countries,

any part of England. In the province of New York, common
labourers earned in 1773, before the commencement of the late

they are not supposed to double in less than five hundred years. In
the British colonies in North America, it has been found that they

disturbances, three shillings and sixpence currency, equal to two
shillings sterling, a-day; ship-carpenters, ten shillings and sixpence

double in twenty or five-and-twenty years. Nor in the present times
is this increase principally owing to the continual importation of

currency, with a pint of rum, worth sixpence sterling, equal in all
to six shillings and sixpence sterling; house-carpenters and brick-

new inhabitants, but to the great multiplication of the species.
Those who live to old age, it is said, frequently see there from fifty

layers, eight shillings currency, equal to four shillings and sixpence
sterling; journeymen tailors, five shillings currency, equal to about

to a hundred, and sometimes many more, descendants from their
own body. Labour is there so well rewarded, that a numerous fam-

two shillings and tenpence sterling. These prices are all above the
London price; and wages are said to be as high in the other colo-

ily of children, instead of being a burden, is a source of opulence
and prosperity to the parents. The labour of each child, before it

nies as in New York. The price of provisions is everywhere in North
America much lower than in England. A dearth has never been

can leave their house, is computed to be worth a hundred pounds
clear gain to them. A young widow with four or five young chil-

known there. In the worst seasons they have always had a sufficiency for themselves, though less for exportation. If the money

dren, who, among the middling or inferior ranks of people in
Europe, would have so little chance for a second husband, is there

price of labour, therefore, be higher than it is anywhere in the
mother-country, its real price, the real command of the neces-

frequently courted as a sort of fortune. The value of children is the
greatest of all encouragements to marriage. We cannot, therefore,

saries and conveniencies of life which it conveys to the labourer,
must be higher in a still greater proportion.

wonder that the people in North America should generally marry
very young. Notwithstanding the great increase occasioned by such

But though North America is not yet so rich as England, it is
much more thriving, and advancing with much greater rapidity

early marriages, there is a continual complaint of the scarcity of
hands in North America. The demand for labourers, the funds

to the further acquisition of riches. The most decisive mark of the

destined for maintaining them increase, it seems, still faster than

63

The Wealth of Nations
they can find labourers to employ.
Though the wealth of a country should be very great, yet if it

tion, industry, and populousness, almost in the same terms in which
they are described by travellers in the present times. It had, per-

has been long stationary, we must not expect to find the wages of
labour very high in it. The funds destined for the payment of

haps, even long before his time, acquired that full complement of
riches which the nature of its laws and institutions permits it to

wages, the revenue and stock of its inhabitants, may be of the
greatest extent; but if they have continued for several centuries of

acquire. The accounts of all travellers, inconsistent in many other
respects, agree in the low wages of labour, and in the difficulty

the same, or very nearly of the same extent, the number of labourers
employed every year could easily supply, and even more than sup-

which a labourer finds in bringing up a family in China. If by
digging the ground a whole day he can get what will purchase a

ply, the number wanted the following year. There could seldom
be any scarcity of hands, nor could the masters be obliged to bid

small quantity of rice in the evening, he is contented. The condition of artificers is, if possible, still worse. Instead of waiting indo-

against one another in order to get them. The hands, on the contrary, would, in this case, naturally multiply beyond their employ-

lently in their work-houses for the calls of their customers, as in
Europe, they are continually running about the streets with the

ment. There would be a constant scarcity of employment, and the
labourers would be obliged to bid against one another in order to

tools of their respective trades, offering their services, and, as it
were, begging employment. The poverty of the lower ranks of

get it. If in such a country the wages off labour had ever been
more than sufficient to maintain the labourer, and to enable him

people in China far surpasses that of the most beggarly nations in
Europe. In the neighbourhood of Canton, many hundred, it is

to bring up a family, the competition of the labourers and the
interest of the masters would soon reduce them to the lowest rate

commonly said, many thousand families have no habitation on
the land, but live constantly in little fishing-boats upon the rivers

which is consistent with common humanity. China has been long
one of the richest, that is, one of the most fertile, best cultivated,

and canals. The subsistence which they find there is so scanty, that
they are eager to fish up the nastiest garbage thrown overboard

most industrious, and most populous, countries in the world. It
seems, however, to have been long stationary. Marco Polo, who

from any European ship. Any carrion, the carcase of a dead dog or
cat, for example, though half putrid and stinking, is as welcome

visited it more than five hundred years ago, describes its cultiva-

to them as the most wholesome food to the people of other coun-

64

Adam Smith
tries. Marriage is encouraged in China, not by the profitableness
of children, but by the liberty of destroying them. In all great

classes, the competition for employment would be so great in it,
as to reduce the wages of labour to the most miserable and scanty

towns, several are every night exposed in the street, or drowned
like puppies in the water. The performance of this horrid office is

subsistence of the labourer. Many would not be able to find employment even upon these hard terms, but would either starve, or

even said to be the avowed business by which some people earn
their subsistence.

be driven to seek a subsistence, either by begging, or by the perpetration perhaps, of the greatest enormities. Want, famine, and mor-

China, however, though it may, perhaps, stand still, does not
seem to go backwards. Its towns are nowhere deserted by their

tality, would immediately prevail in that class, and from thence
extend themselves to all the superior classes, till the number of

inhabitants. The lands which had once been cultivated, are nowhere neglected. The same, or very nearly the same, annual labour,

inhabitants in the country was reduced to what could easily be
maintained by the revenue and stock which remained in it, and

must, therefore, continue to be performed, and the funds destined for maintaining it must not, consequently, be sensibly di-

which had escaped either the tyranny or calamity which had destroyed the rest. This, perhaps, is nearly the present state of Ben-

minished. The lowest class of labourers, therefore, notwithstanding their scanty subsistence, must some way or another make shift

gal, and of some other of the English settlements in the East Indies.
In a fertile country, which had before been much depopulated,

to continue their race so far as to keep up their usual numbers.
But it would be otherwise in a country where the funds des-

where subsistence, consequently, should not be very difficult, and
where, notwithstanding, three or four hundred thousand people

tined for the maintenance of labour were sensibly decaying. Every
year the demand for servants and labourers would, in all the dif-

die of hunger in one year, we maybe assured that the funds destined for the maintenance of the labouring poor are fast decaying.

ferent classes of employments, be less than it had been the year
before. Many who had been bred in the superior classes, not being

The difference between the genius of the British constitution, which
protects and governs North America, and that of the mercantile

able to find employment in their own business, would be glad to
seek it in the lowest. The lowest class being not only overstocked

company which oppresses and domineers in the East Indies, cannot, perhaps, be better illustrated than by the different state of

with its own workmen, but with the overflowings of all the other

those countries.

65

The Wealth of Nations
The liberal reward of labour, therefore, as it is the necessary
effect, so it is the natural symptom of increasing national wealth.

what is necessary to maintain his family through the whole year. A
slave, however, or one absolutely dependent on us for immediate

The scanty maintenance of the labouring poor, on the other hand,
is the natural symptom that things are at a stand, and their starv-

subsistence, would not be treated in this manner. His daily subsistence would be proportioned to his daily necessities.

ing condition, that they are going fast backwards.
In Great Britain, the wages of labour seem, in the present times,

Secondly, the wages of labour do not, in Great Britain, fluctuate
with the price of provisions. These vary everywhere from year to

to be evidently more than what is precisely necessary to enable the
labourer to bring up a family. In order to satisfy ourselves upon

year, frequently from month to month. But in many places, the
money price of labour remains uniformly the same, sometimes

this point, it will not be necessary to enter into any tedious or
doubtful calculation of what may be the lowest sum upon winch

for half a century together. If, in these places, therefore, the
labouring poor can maintain their families in dear years, they must

it is possible to do this. There are many plain symptoms, that the
wages of labour are nowhere in this country regulated by this low-

be at their ease in times of moderate plenty, and in affluence in
those of extraordinary cheapness. The high price of provisions

est rate, which is consistent with common humanity.
First, in almost every part of Great Britain there is a distinction,

during these ten years past, has not, in many parts of the kingdom, been accompanied with any sensible rise in the money price

even in the lowest species of labour, between summer and winter
wages. Summer wages are always highest. But, on account of the

of labour. It has, indeed, in some; owing, probably, more to the
increase of the demand for labour, than to that of the price of

extraordinary expense of fuel, the maintenance of a family is most
expensive in winter. Wages, therefore, being highest when this ex-

provisions.
Thirdly, as the price of provisions varies more from year to year

pense is lowest, it seems evident that they are not regulated by
what is necessary for this expense, but by the quantity and sup-

than the wages of labour, so, on the other hand, the wages of
labour vary more from place to place than the price of provisions.

posed value of the work. A labourer, it may be said, indeed, ought
to save part of his summer wages, in order to defray his winter

The prices of bread and butchers’ meat are generally the same, or
very nearly the same, through the greater part of the united king-

expense; and that, through the whole year, they do not exceed

dom. These, and most other things which are sold by retail, the

66

Adam Smith
way in which the labouring poor buy all things, are generally fully
as cheap, or cheaper, in great towns than in the remoter parts of

in affluence where it is highest.
Fourthly, the variations in the price of labour not only do not

the country, for reasons which I shall have occasion to explain
hereafter. But the wages of labour in a great town and its

correspond, either in place or time, with those in the price of provisions, but they are frequently quite opposite.

neighbourhood, are frequently a fourth or a fifth part, twenty or
five-and—twenty per cent. higher than at a few miles distance.

Grain, the food of the common people, is dearer in Scotland
than in England, whence Scotland receives almost every year very

Eighteen pence a day may be reckoned the common price of labour
in London and its neighbourhood. At a few miles distance, it falls

large supplies. But English corn must be sold dearer in Scotland,
the country to which it is brought, than in England, the country

to fourteen and fifteen pence. Tenpence may be reckoned its price
in Edinburgh and its neighbourhood. At a few miles distance, it

from which it comes; and in proportion to its quality it cannot be
sold dearer in Scotland than the Scotch corn that comes to the

falls to eightpence, the usual price of common labour through the
greater part of the low country of Scotland, where it varies a good

same market in competition with it. The quality of grain depends
chiefly upon the quantity of flour or meal which it yields at the

deal less than in England. Such a difference of prices, which, it
seems, is not always sufficient to transport a man from one parish

mill; and, in this respect, English grain is so much superior to the
Scotch, that though often dearer in appearance, or in proportion

to another, would necessarily occasion so great a transportation of
the most bulky commodities, not only from one parish to an-

to the measure of its bulk, it is generally cheaper in reality, or in
proportion to its quality, or even to the measure of its weight. The

other, but from one end of the kingdom, almost from one end of
the world to the other, as would soon reduce them more nearly to

price of labour, on the contrary, is dearer in England than in Scotland. If the labouring poor, therefore, can maintain their families

a level. After all that has been said of the levity and inconstancy of
human nature, it appears evidently from experience, that man is,

in the one part of the united kingdom, they must be in affluence
in the other. Oatmeal, indeed, supplies the common people in

of all sorts of luggage, the most difficult to be transported. If the
labouring poor, therefore, can maintain their families in those parts

Scotland with the greatest and the best part of their food, which
is, in general, much inferior to that of their neighbours of the

of the kingdom where the price of labour is lowest, they must be

same rank in England. This difference, however, in the mode of

67

The Wealth of Nations
their subsistence, is not the cause, but the effect, of the difference
in their wages; though, by a strange misapprehension, I have fre-

most usual day-wages of common labour through the greater part
of Scotland were sixpence in summer, and fivepence in winter.

quently heard it represented as the cause. It is not because one
man keeps a coach, while his neighbour walks a-foot, that the one

Three shillings a-week, the same price, very nearly still continues
to be paid in some parts of the Highlands and Western islands.

is rich, and the other poor; but because the one is rich, he keeps a
coach, and because the other is poor, he walks a-foot.

Through the greater part of the Low country, the most usual wages
of common labour are now eight pence a-day; tenpence, some-

During the course of the last century, taking one year with another, grain was dearer in both parts of the united kingdom than

times a shilling, about Edinburgh, in the counties which border
upon England, probably on account of that neighbourhood, and

during that of the present. This is a matter of fact which cannot
now admit of any reasonable doubt; and the proof of it is, if pos-

in a few other places where there has lately been a considerable rise
in the demand for labour, about Glasgow, Carron, Ayrshire, etc.

sible, still more decisive with regard to Scotland than with regard
to England. It is in Scotland supported by the evidence of the

In England, the improvements of agriculture, manufactures, and
commerce, began much earlier than in Scotland. The demand for

public fiars, annual valuations made upon oath, according to the
actual state of the markets, of all the different sorts of grain in

labour, and consequently its price, must necessarily have increased
with those improvements. In the last century, accordingly, as well

every different county of Scotland. If such direct proof could require any collateral evidence to confirm it, I would observe, that

as in the present, the wages of labour were higher in England than
in Scotland. They have risen, too, considerably since that time,

this has likewise been the case in France, and probably in most
other parts of Europe. With regard to France, there is the clearest

though, on account of the greater variety of wages paid there in
different places, it is more difficult to ascertain how much. In

proof. But though it is certain, that in both parts of the united
kingdom grain was somewhat dearer in the last century than in

1614, the pay of a foot soldier was the same as in the present
times, eightpence a-day. When it was first established, it would

the present, it is equally certain that labour was much cheaper. If
the labouring poor, therefore, could bring up their families then,

naturally be regulated by the usual wages of common labourers,
the rank of people from which foot soldiers are commonly drawn.

they must be much more at their ease now. In the last century, the

Lord-chief-justice Hales, who wrote in the time of Charles II. com-

68

Adam Smith
putes the necessary expense of a labourer’s family, consisting of six
persons, the father and mother, two children able to do some-

workman, but according to the easiness or hardness of the masters. Where wages are not regulated by law, all that we can pretend

thing, and two not able, at ten shillings a-week, or twenty-six
pounds a-year. If they cannot earn this by their labour, they must

to determine is, what are the most usual; and experience seems to
shew that law can never regulate them properly, though it has

make it up, he supposes, either by begging or stealing. He appears
to have enquired very carefully into this subject {See his scheme

often pretended to do so.
The real recompence of labour, the real quantity of the neces-

for the maintenance of the poor, in Burn’s History of the Poor
Laws.}. In 1688, Mr Gregory King, whose skill in political arith-

saries and conveniencies of life which it can procure to the labourer,
has, during the course of the present century, increased perhaps in

metic is so much extolled by Dr Davenant, computed the ordinary income of labourers and out-servants to be fifteen pounds a-

a still greater proportion than its money price. Not only grain has
become somewhat cheaper, but many other things, from which

year to a family, which he supposed to consist, one with another,
of three and a half persons. His calculation, therefore, though dif-

the industrious poor derive an agreeable and wholesome variety of
food, have become a great deal cheaper. Potatoes, for example, do

ferent in appearance, corresponds very nearly at bottom with that
of Judge Hales. Both suppose the weekly expense of such families

not at present, through the greater part of the kingdom, cost half
the price which they used to do thirty or forty years ago. The same

to be about twenty-pence a-head. Both the pecuniary income and
expense of such families have increased considerably since that

thing may be said of turnips, carrots, cabbages; things which were
formerly never raised but by the spade, but which are now com-

time through the greater part of the kingdom, in some places more,
and in some less, though perhaps scarce anywhere so much as

monly raised by the plough. All sort of garden stuff, too, has become cheaper. The greater part of the apples, and even of the on-

some exaggerated accounts of the present wages of labour have
lately represented them to the public. The price of labour, it must

ions, consumed in Great Britain, were, in the last century, imported from Flanders. The great improvements in the coarser

be observed, cannot be ascertained very accurately anywhere, different prices being often paid at the same place and for the same

manufactories of both linen and woollen cloth furnish the labourers
with cheaper and better clothing; and those in the manufactories

sort of labour, not only according to the different abilities of the

of the coarser metals, with cheaper and better instruments of trade,

69

The Wealth of Nations
as well as with many agreeable and convenient pieces of household furniture. Soap, salt, candles, leather, and fermented liquors,

well fed, clothed, and lodged.
Poverty, though it no doubt discourages, does not always pre-

have, indeed, become a good deal dearer, chiefly from the taxes
which have been laid upon them. The quantity of these, however,

vent, marriage. It seems even to be favourable to generation. A
half-starved Highland woman frequently bears more than twenty

which the labouring poor an under any necessity of consuming, is
so very small, that the increase in their price does not compensate

children, while a pampered fine lady is often incapable of bearing
any, and is generally exhausted by two or three. Barrenness, so

the diminution in that of so many other things. The common
complaint, that luxury extends itself even to the lowest ranks of

frequent among women of fashion, is very rare among those of
inferior station. Luxury, in the fair sex, while it inflames, perhaps,

the people, and that the labouring poor will not now be contented with the same food, clothing, and lodging, which satisfied

the passion for enjoyment, seems always to weaken, and frequently
to destroy altogether, the powers of generation.

them in former times, may convince us that it is not the money
price of labour only, but its real recompence, which has augmented.

But poverty, though it does not prevent the generation, is extremely unfavourable to the rearing of children. The tender plant

Is this improvement in the circumstances of the lower ranks of
the people to be regarded as an advantage, or as an inconveniency,

is produced; but in so cold a soil, and so severe a climate, soon
withers and dies. It is not uncommon, I have been frequently told,

to the society? The answer seems at first abundantly plain. Servants, labourers, and workmen of different kinds, make up the far

in the Highlands of Scotland, for a mother who has born twenty
children not to have two alive. Several officers of great experience

greater part of every great political society. But what improves the
circumstances of the greater part, can never be regarded as any

have assured me, that, so far from recruiting their regiment, they
have never been able to supply it with drums and fifes, from all

inconveniency to the whole. No society can surely be flourishing
and happy, of which the far greater part of the members are poor

the soldiers’ children that were born in it. A greater number of
fine children, however, is seldom seen anywhere than about a bar-

and miserable. It is but equity, besides, that they who feed, clothe,
and lodge the whole body of the people, should have such a share

rack of soldiers. Very few of them, it seems, arrive at the age of
thirteen or fourteen. In some places, one half the children die

of the produce of their own labour as to be themselves tolerably

before they are four years of age, in many places before they are

70

Adam Smith
seven, and in almost all places before they are nine or ten. This
great mortality, however will everywhere be found chiefly among

tion of labourers, as may enable them to supply that continually
increasing demand by a continually increasing population. If the

the children of the common people, who cannot afford to tend
them with the same care as those of better station. Though their

reward should at any time be less than what was requisite for this
purpose, the deficiency of hands would soon raise it; and if it

marriages are generally more fruitful than those of people of fashion, a smaller proportion of their children arrive at maturity. In

should at any time be more, their excessive multiplication would
soon lower it to this necessary rate. The market would be so much

foundling hospitals, and among the children brought up by parish charities, the mortality is still greater than among those of the

understocked with labour in the one case, and so much overstocked
in the other, as would soon force back its price to that proper rate

common people.
Every species of animals naturally multiplies in proportion to

which the circumstances of the society required. It is in this manner that the demand for men, like that for any other commodity,

the means of their subsistence, and no species can ever multiply
be yond it. But in civilized society, it is only among the inferior

necessarily regulates the production of men, quickens it when it
goes on too slowly, and stops it when it advances too fast. It is this

ranks of people that the scantiness of subsistence can set limits to
the further multiplication of the human species; and it can do so

demand which regulates and determines the state of propagation
in all the different countries of the world; in North America, in

in no other way than by destroying a great part of the children
which their fruitful marriages produce.

Europe, and in China; which renders it rapidly progressive in the
first, slow and gradual in the second, and altogether stationary in

The liberal reward of labour, by enabling them to provide better
for their children, and consequently to bring up a greater number,

the last.
The wear and tear of a slave, it has been said, is at the expense of

naturally tends to widen and extend those limits. It deserves to be
remarked, too, that it necessarily does this as nearly as possible in

his master; but that of a free servant is at his own expense. The
wear and tear of the latter, however, is, in reality, as much at the

the proportion which the demand for labour requires. If this demand is continually increasing, the reward of labour must neces-

expense of his master as that of the former. The wages paid to
journeymen and servants of every kind must be such as may en-

sarily encourage in such a manner the marriage and multiplica-

able them, one with another to continue the race of journeymen

71

The Wealth of Nations
and servants, according as the increasing, diminishing, or stationary demand of the society, may happen to require. But though the

state, while the society is advancing to the further acquisition,
rather than when it has acquired its full complement of riches,

wear and tear of a free servant be equally at the expense of his
master, it generally costs him much less than that of a slave. The

that the condition of the labouring poor, of the great body of the
people, seems to be the happiest and the most comfortable. It is

fund destined for replacing or repairing, if I may say so, the wear
and tear of the slave, is commonly managed by a negligent master

hard in the stationary, and miserable in the declining state. The
progressive state is, in reality, the cheerful and the hearty state to

or careless overseer. That destined for performing the same office
with regard to the freeman is managed by the freeman himself.

all the different orders of the society; the stationary is dull; the
declining melancholy.

The disorders which generally prevail in the economy of the rich,
naturally introduce themselves into the management of the former;

The liberal reward of labour, as it encourages the propagation,
so it increases the industry of the common people. The wages of

the strict frugality and parsimonious attention of the poor as naturally establish themselves in that of the latter. Under such differ-

labour are the encouragement of industry, which, like every other
human quality, improves in proportion to the encouragement it

ent management, the same purpose must require very different
degrees of expense to execute it. It appears, accordingly, from the

receives. A plentiful subsistence increases the bodily strength of
the labourer, and the comfortable hope of bettering his condition,

experience of all ages and nations, I believe, that the work done by
freemen comes cheaper in the end than that performed by slaves.

and of ending his days, perhaps, in ease and plenty, animates him
to exert that strength to the utmost. Where wages are high, ac-

It is found to do so even at Boston, New-York, and Philadelphia,
where the wages of common labour are so very high.

cordingly, we shall always find the workmen more active, diligent,
and expeditious, than where they are low; in England, for example,

The liberal reward of labour, therefore, as it is the effect of increasing wealth, so it is the cause of increasing population. To

than in Scotland; in the neighbourhood of great towns, than in
remote country places. Some workmen, indeed, when they can

complain of it, is to lament over the necessary cause and effect of
the greatest public prosperity.

earn in four days what will maintain them through the week, will
be idle the other three. This, however, is by no means the case

It deserves to be remarked, perhaps, that it is in the progressive

with the greater part. Workmen, on the contrary, when they are

72

Adam Smith
liberally paid by the piece, are very apt to overwork themselves,
and to ruin their health and constitution in a few years. A carpen-

great desire of relaxation, which, if not restrained by force, or by
some strong necessity, is almost irresistible. It is the call of nature,

ter in London, and in some other places, is not supposed to last in
his utmost vigour above eight years. Something of the same kind

which requires to be relieved by some indulgence, sometimes of
ease only, but sometimes too of dissipation and diversion. If it is

happens in many other trades, in which the workmen are paid by
the piece; as they generally are in manufactures, and even in coun-

not complied with, the consequences are often dangerous and
sometimes fatal, and such as almost always, sooner or later, bring

try labour, wherever wages are higher than ordinary. Almost every
class of artificers is subject to some peculiar infirmity occasioned

on the peculiar infirmity of the trade. If masters would always
listen to the dictates of reason and humanity, they have frequently

by excessive application to their peculiar species of work.
Ramuzzini, an eminent Italian physician, has written a particular

occasion rather to moderate, than to animate the application of
many of their workmen. It will be found, I believe, in every sort of

book concerning such diseases. We do not reckon our soldiers the
most industrious set of people among us; yet when soldiers have

trade, that the man who works so moderately, as to be able to
work constantly, not only preserves his health the longest, but, in

been employed in some particular sorts of work, and liberally paid
by the piece, their officers have frequently been obliged to stipu-

the course of the year, executes the greatest quantity of work.
In cheap years it is pretended, workmen are generally more idle,

late with the undertaker, that they should not be allowed to earn
above a certain sum every day, according to the rate at which they

and in dear times more industrious than ordinary. A plentiful subsistence, therefore, it has been concluded, relaxes, and a scanty

were paid. Till this stipulation was made, mutual emulation, and
the desire of greater gain, frequently prompted them to overwork

one quickens their industry. That a little more plenty than ordinary may render some workmen idle, cannot be well doubted; but

themselves, and to hurt their health by excessive labour. Excessive
application, during four days of the week, is frequently the real

that it should have this effect upon the greater part, or that men in
general should work better when they are ill fed, than when they

cause of the idleness of the other three, so much and so loudly
complained of. Great labour, either of mind or body, continued

are well fed, when they are disheartened than when they are in
good spirits, when they are frequently sick than when they are

for several days together is, in most men, naturally followed by a

generally in good health, seems not very probable. Years of dearth,

73

The Wealth of Nations
it is to be observed, are generally among the common people years
of sickness and mortality, which cannot fail to diminish the pro-

of both servants and journeymen frequently sink in dear years.
Masters of all sorts, therefore, frequently make better bargains

duce of their industry.
In years of plenty, servants frequently leave their masters, and

with their servants in dear than in cheap years, and find them
more humble and dependent in the former than in the latter. They

trust their subsistence to what they can make by their own industry. But the same cheapness of provisions, by increasing the fund

naturally, therefore, commend the former as more favourable to
industry. Landlords and farmers, besides, two of the largest classes

which is destined for the maintenance of servants, encourages
masters, farmers especially, to employ a greater number. Farmers,

of masters, have another reason for being pleased with dear years.
The rents of the one, and the profits of the other, depend very

upon such occasions, expect more profit from their corn by maintaining a few more labouring servants, than by selling it at a low

much upon the price of provisions. Nothing can be more absurd,
however, than to imagine that men in general should work less

price in the market. The demand for servants increases, while the
number of those who offer to supply that demand diminishes.

when they work for themselves, than when they work for other
people. A poor independent workman will generally be more in-

The price of labour, therefore, frequently rises in cheap years.
In years of scarcity, the difficulty and uncertainty of subsistence

dustrious than even a journeyman who works by the piece. The
one enjoys the whole produce of his own industry, the other shares

make all such people eager to return to service. But the high price
of provisions, by diminishing the funds destined for the mainte-

it with his master. The one, in his separate independent state, is
less liable to the temptations of bad company, which, in large manu-

nance of servants, disposes masters rather to diminish than to increase the number of those they have. In dear years, too, poor

factories, so frequently ruin the morals of the other. The superiority of the independent workman over those servants who are hired

independent workmen frequently consume the little stock with
which they had used to supply themselves with the materials of

by the month or by the year, and whose wages and maintenance
are the same, whether they do much or do little, is likely to be still

their work, and are obliged to become journeymen for subsistence. More people want employment than easily get it; many are

greater. Cheap years tend to increase the proportion of independent workmen to journeymen and servants of all kinds, and dear

willing to take it upon lower terms than ordinary; and the wages

years to diminish it.

74

Adam Smith
A French author of great knowledge and ingenuity, Mr Messance,
receiver of the taillies in the election of St Etienne, endeavours to

deed, appear to have declined very considerably. But in 1756, another year or great scarcity, the Scotch manufactures made more

shew that the poor do more work in cheap than in dear years, by
comparing the quantity and value of the goods made upon those

than ordinary advances. The Yorkshire manufacture, indeed, declined, and its produce did not rise to what it had been in 1755,

different occasions in three different manufactures; one of coarse
woollens, carried on at Elbeuf; one of linen, and another of silk,

till 1766, after the repeal of the American stamp act. In that and
the following year, it greatly exceeded what it had ever been be-

both which extend through the whole generality of Rouen. It appears from his account, which is copied from the registers of the

fore, and it has continued to advance ever since.
The produce of all great manufactures for distant sale must nec-

public offices, that the quantity and value of the goods made in all
those three manufactories has generally been greater in cheap than

essarily depend, not so much upon the dearness or cheapness of
the seasons in the countries where they are carried on, as upon the

in dear years, and that it has always been; greatest in the cheapest,
and least in the dearest years. All the three seem to be stationary

circumstances which affect the demand in the countries where
they are consumed; upon peace or war, upon the prosperity or

manufactures, or which, though their produce may vary somewhat from year to year, are, upon the whole, neither going back-

declension of other rival manufactures and upon the good or bad
humour of their principal customers. A great part of the extraor-

wards nor forwards.
The manufacture of linen in Scotland, and that of coarse

dinary work, besides, which is probably done in cheap years, never
enters the public registers of manufactures. The men-servants, who

woollens in the West Riding of Yorkshire, are growing manufactures, of which the produce is generally, though with some varia-

leave their masters, become independent labourers. The women
return to their parents, and commonly spin, in order to make

tions, increasing both in quantity and value. Upon examining,
however, the accounts which have been published of their annual

clothes for themselves and their families. Even the independent
workmen do not always, work for public sale, but are employed

produce, I have not been able to observe that its variations have
had any sensible connection with the dearness or cheapness of the

by some of their neighbours in manufactures for family use. The
produce of their labour, therefore, frequently makes no figure in

seasons. In 1740, a year of great scarcity, both manufactures, in-

those public registers, of which the records are sometimes pub-

75

The Wealth of Nations
lished with so much parade, and from which our merchants and
manufacturers would often vainly pretend to announce the pros-

the hands of many of the employers of industry, sufficient to maintain and employ a greater number of industrious people than had

perity or declension of the greatest empires.
Through the variations in the price of labour not only do not

been employed the year before; and this extraordinary number
cannot always be had. Those masters, therefore, who want more

always correspond with those in the price of provisions, but are
frequently quite opposite, we must not, upon this account, imag-

workmen, bid against one another, in order to get them, which
sometimes raises both the real and the money price of their labour.

ine that the price of provisions has no influence upon that of labour.
The money price of labour is necessarily regulated by two circum-

The contrary of this happens in a year of sudden and extraordinary scarcity. The funds destined for employing industry are less

stances; the demand for labour, and the price of the necessaries
and conveniencies of life. The demand for labour, according as it

than they had been the year before. A considerable number of
people are thrown out of employment, who bid one against an-

happens to be increasing, stationary, or declining, or to require an
increasing, stationary, or declining population, determines the

other, in order to get it, which sometimes lowers both the real and
the money price of labour. In 1740, a year of extraordinary scar-

quantities of the necessaries and conveniencies of life which must
be given to the labourer; and the money price of labour is deter-

city, many people were willing to work for bare subsistence. In the
succeeding years of plenty, it was more difficult to get labourers

mined by what is requisite for purchasing this quantity. Though
the money price of labour, therefore, is sometimes high where the

and servants. The scarcity of a dear year, by diminishing the demand for labour, tends to lower its price, as the high price of pro-

price of provisions is low, it would be still higher, the demand
continuing the same, if the price of provisions was high.

visions tends to raise it. The plenty of a cheap year, on the contrary, by increasing the demand, tends to raise the price of labour,

It is because the demand for labour increases in years of sudden
and extraordinary plenty, and diminishes in those of sudden and

as the cheapness of provisions tends to lower it. In the ordinary
variations of the prices of provisions, those two opposite causes

extraordinary scarcity, that the money price of labour sometimes
rises in the one, and sinks in the other.

seem to counterbalance one another, which is probably, in part,
the reason why the wages of labour are everywhere so much more

In a year of sudden and extraordinary plenty, there are funds in

steady and permanent than the price of provisions.

76

Adam Smith
The increase in the wages of labour necessarily increases the
price of many commodities, by increasing that part of it which

CHAPTER IX

resolves itself into wages, and so far tends to diminish their consumption, both at home and abroad. The same cause, however,

OF THE PROFITS OF STOCK

which raises the wages of labour, the increase of stock, tends to
increase its productive powers, and to make a smaller quantity of

THE RISE AND FALL in the profits of stock depend upon the same
causes with the rise and fall in the wages of labour, the increasing

labour produce a greater quantity of work. The owner of the stock
which employs a great number of labourers necessarily endeavours,

or declining state of the wealth of the society; but those causes
affect the one and the other very differently.

for his own advantage, to make such a proper division and distribution of employment, that they may be enabled to produce the

The increase of stock, which raises wages, tends to lower profit.
When the stocks of many rich merchants are turned into the same

greatest quantity of work possible. For the same reason, he
endeavours to supply them with the best machinery which either

trade, their mutual competition naturally tends to lower its profit;
and when there is a like increase of stock in all the different trades

he or they can think of. What takes place among the labourers in
a particular workhouse, takes place, for the same reason, among

carried on in the same society, the same competition must produce the same effect in them all.

those of a great society. The greater their number, the more they
naturally divide themselves into different classes and subdivisions

It is not easy, it has already been observed, to ascertain what are
the average wages of labour, even in a particular place, and at a

of employments. More heads are occupied in inventing the most
proper machinery for executing the work of each, and it is, there-

particular time. We can, even in this case, seldom determine more
than what are the most usual wages. But even this can seldom be

fore, more likely to be invented. There me many commodities,
therefore, which, in consequence of these improvements, come to

done with regard to the profits of stock. Profit is so very fluctuating, that the person who carries on a particular trade, cannot al-

be produced by so much less labour than before, that the increase
of its price is more than compensated by the diminution of its

ways tell you himself what is the average of his annual profit. It is
affected, not only by every variation of price in the commodities

quantity.

which he deals in, but by the good or bad fortune both of his

77

The Wealth of Nations
rivals and of his customers, and by a thousand other accidents, to
which goods, when carried either by sea or by land, or even when

interest. This prohibition, however, like all others of the same kind,
is said to have produced no effect, and probably rather increased

stored in a warehouse, are liable. It varies, therefore, not only from
year to year, but from day to day, and almost from hour to hour. To

than diminished the evil of usury. The statute of Henry VIII. was
revived by the 13th of Elizabeth, cap. 8. and ten per cent. contin-

ascertain what is the average profit of all the different trades carried
on in a great kingdom, must be much more difficult; and to judge

ued to be the legal rate of interest till the 21st of James I. when it
was restricted to eight per cent. It was reduced to six per cent.

of what it may have been formerly, or in remote periods of time,
with any degree of precision, must be altogether impossible.

soon after the Restoration, and by the 12th of Queen Anne, to
five per cent. All these different statutory regulations seem to have

But though it may be impossible to determine, with any degree
of precision, what are or were the average profits of stock, either in

been made with great propriety. They seem to have followed, and
not to have gone before, the market rate of interest, or the rate at

the present or in ancient times, some notion may be formed of
them from the interest of money. It may be laid down as a maxim,

which people of good credit usually borrowed. Since the time of
Queen Anne, five per cent. seems to have been rather above than

that wherever a great deal can be made by the use of money, a
great deal will commonly be given for the use of it; and that, wher-

below the market rate. Before the late war, the government borrowed at three per cent.; and people of good credit in the capital,

ever little can be made by it, less will commonly he given for it.
Accordingly, therefore, as the usual market rate of interest varies

and in many other parts of the kingdom, at three and a-half, four,
and four and a-half per cent.

in any country, we may be assured that the ordinary profits of
stock must vary with it, must sink as it sinks, and rise as it rises.

Since the time of Henry VIII. the wealth and revenue of the
country have been continually advancing, and in the course of

The progress of interest, therefore, may lead us to form some notion of the progress of profit.

their progress, their pace seems rather to have been gradually accelerated than retarded. They seem not only to have been going

By the 37th of Henry VIII. all interest above ten per cent. was
declared unlawful. More, it seems, had sometimes been taken be-

on, but to have been going on faster and faster. The wages of
labour have been continually increasing during the same period,

fore that. In the reign of Edward VI. religious zeal prohibited all

and, in the greater part of the different branches of trade and manu-

78

Adam Smith
factures, the profits of stock have been diminishing.
It generally requires a greater stock to carry on any sort of trade

The common rate of profit, therefore, must be somewhat greater.
The wages of labour, it has already been observed, are lower in

in a great town than in a country village. The great stocks employed in every branch of trade, and the number of rich competi-

Scotland than in England. The country, too, is not only much
poorer, but the steps by which it advances to a better condition,

tors, generally reduce the rate of profit in the former below what it
is in the latter. But the wages of labour are generally higher in a

for it is evidently advancing, seem to be much slower and more
tardy. The legal rate of interest in France has not during the course

great town than in a country village. In a thriving town, the people
who have great stocks to employ, frequently cannot get the num-

of the present century, been always regulated by the market rate
{See Denisart, Article Taux des Interests, tom. iii, p.13}. In 1720,

ber of workmen they want, and therefore bid against one another,
in order to get as many as they can, which raises the wages of

interest was reduced from the twentieth to the fiftieth penny, or
from five to two per cent. In 1724, it was raised to the thirtieth

labour, and lowers the profits of stock. In the remote parts of the
country, there is frequently not stock sufficient to employ all the

penny, or to three and a third per cent. In 1725, it was again raised
to the twentieth penny, or to five per cent. In 1766, during the

people, who therefore bid against one another, in order to get
employment, which lowers the wages of labour, and raises the prof-

administration of Mr Laverdy, it was reduced to the twenty-fifth
penny, or to four per cent. The Abbé Terray raised it afterwards to

its of stock.
In Scotland, though the legal rate of interest is the same as in

the old rate of five per cent. The supposed purpose of many of
those violent reductions of interest was to prepare the way for

England, the market rate is rather higher. People of the best credit
there seldom borrow under five per cent. Even private bankers in

reducing that of the public debts; a purpose which has sometimes
been executed. France is, perhaps, in the present times, not so rich

Edinburgh give four per cent. upon their promissory-notes, of
which payment, either in whole or in part may be demanded at

a country as England; and though the legal rate of interest has in
France frequently been lower than in England, the market rate has

pleasure. Private bankers in London give no interest for the money
which is deposited with them. There are few trades which cannot

generally been higher; for there, as in other countries, they have
several very safe and easy methods of evading the law. The profits

be carried on with a smaller stock in Scotland than in England.

of trade, I have been assured by British merchants who had traded

79

The Wealth of Nations
in both countries, are higher in France than in England; and it is
no doubt upon this account, that many British subjects chuse

lar branches of it are so; but these symptoms seem to indicate
sufficiently that there is no general decay. When profit dimin-

rather to employ their capitals in a country where trade is in disgrace, than in one where it is highly respected. The wages of labour

ishes, merchants are very apt to complain that trade decays, though
the diminution of profit is the natural effect of its prosperity, or of

are lower in France than in England. When you go from Scotland
to England, the difference which you may remark between the

a greater stock being employed in it than before. During the late
war, the Dutch gained the whole carrying trade of France, of which

dress and countenance of the common people in the one country
and in the other, sufficiently indicates the difference in their con-

they still retain a very large share. The great property which they
possess both in French and English funds, about forty millions, it

dition. The contrast is still greater when you return from France.
France, though no doubt a richer country than Scotland, seems

is said in the latter (in which, I suspect, however, there is a considerable exaggeration ), the great sums which they lend to private

not to be going forward so fast. It is a common and even a popular
opinion in the country, that it is going backwards; an opinion

people, in countries where the rate of interest is higher than in
their own, are circumstances which no doubt demonstrate the re-

which I apprehend, is ill-founded, even with regard to France, but
which nobody can possibly entertain with regard to Scotland, who

dundancy of their stock, or that it has increased beyond what they
can employ with tolerable profit in the proper business of their

sees the country now, and who saw it twenty or thirty years ago.
The province of Holland, on the other hand, in proportion to

own country; but they do not demonstrate that that business has
decreased. As the capital of a private man, though acquired by a

the extent of its territory and the number of its people, is a richer
country than England. The government there borrow at two per

particular trade, may increase beyond what he can employ in it,
and yet that trade continue to increase too, so may likewise the

cent. and private people of good credit at three. The wages of
labour are said to be higher in Holland than in England, and the

capital of a great nation.
In our North American and West Indian colonies, not only the

Dutch, it is well known, trade upon lower profits than any people
in Europe. The trade of Holland, it has been pretended by some

wages of labour, but the interest of money, and consequently the
profits of stock, are higher than in England. In the different colo-

people, is decaying, and it may perhaps be true that some particu-

nies, both the legal and the market rate of interest run from six to

80

Adam Smith
eight percent. High wages of labour and high profits of stock,
however, are things, perhaps, which scarce ever go together, ex-

been considerably reduced during the course of the present century. As riches, improvement, and population, have increased, in-

cept in the peculiar circumstances of new colonies. A new colony
must always, for some time, be more understocked in proportion

terest has declined. The wages of labour do not sink with the profits of stock. The demand for labour increases with the increase of

to the extent of its territory, and more underpeopled in proportion to the extent of its stock, than the greater part of other coun-

stock, whatever be its profits; and after these are diminished, stock
may not only continue to increase, but to increase much faster than

tries. They have more land than they have stock to cultivate. What
they have, therefore, is applied to the cultivation only of what is

before. It is with industrious nations, who are advancing in the acquisition of riches, as with industrious individuals. A great stock,

most fertile and most favourably situated, the land near the seashore, and along the banks of navigable rivers. Such land, too, is

though with small profits, generally increases faster than a small
stock with great profits. Money, says the proverb, makes money.

frequently purchased at a price below the value even of its natural
produce. Stock employed in the purchase and improvement of

When you have got a little, it is often easy to get more. The great
difficulty is to get that little. The connection between the increase

such lands, must yield a very large profit, and, consequently, afford to pay a very large interest. Its rapid accumulation in so prof-

of stock and that of industry, or of the demand for useful labour,
has partly been explained already, but will be explained more fully

itable an employment enables the planter to increase the number
of his hands faster than he can find them in a new settlement.

hereafter, in treating of the accumulation of stock.
The acquisition of new territory, or of new branches of trade,

Those whom he can find, therefore, are very liberally rewarded.
As the colony increases, the profits of stock gradually diminish.

may sometimes raise the profits of stock, and with them the interest of money, even in a country which is fast advancing in the

When the most fertile and best situated lands have been all occupied, less profit can be made by the cultivation of what is inferior

acquisition of riches. The stock of the country, not being sufficient for the whole accession of business which such acquisitions

both in soil and situation, and less interest can be afforded for the
stock which is so employed. In the greater part of our colonies,

present to the different people among whom it is divided, is applied to those particular branches only which afford the greatest

accordingly, both the legal and the market rate of interest have

profit. Part of what had before been employed in other trades, is

81

The Wealth of Nations
necessarily withdrawn from them, and turned into some of the
new and more profitable ones. In all those old trades, therefore,

the wages of labour, so it raises the profits of stock, and consequently the interest of money. By the wages of labour being low-

the competition comes to be Jess than before. The market comes
to be less fully supplied with many different sorts of goods. Their

ered, the owners of what stock remains in the society can bring
their goods at less expense to market than before; and less stock

price necessarily rises more or less, and yields a greater profit to
those who deal in them, who can, therefore, afford to borrow at a

being employed in supplying the market than before, they can sell
them dearer. Their goods cost them less, and they get more for

higher interest. For some time after the conclusion of the late war,
not only private people of the best credit, but some of the greatest

them. Their profits, therefore, being augmented at both ends, can
well afford a large interest. The great fortunes so suddenly and so

companies in London, commonly borrowed at five per cent. who,
before that, had not been used to pay more than four, and four

easily acquired in Bengal and the other British settlements in the
East Indies, may satisfy us, that as the wages of labour are very

and a half per cent. The great accession both of territory and trade
by our acquisitions in North America and the West Indies, will

low, so the profits of stock are very high in those ruined countries.
The interest of money is proportionably so. In Bengal, money is

sufficiently account for this, without supposing any diminution
in the capital stock of the society. So great an accession of new

frequently lent to the farmers at forty, fifty, and sixty per cent. and
the succeeding crop is mortgaged for the payment. As the profits

business to be carried on by the old stock, must necessarily have
diminished the quantity employed in a great number of particular

which can afford such an interest must eat up almost the whole
rent of the landlord, so such enormous usury must in its turn eat

branches, in which the competition being less, the profits must
have been greater. I shall hereafter have occasion to mention the

up the greater part of those profits. Before the fall of the Roman
republic, a usury of the same kind seems to have been common in

reasons which dispose me to believe that the capital stock of Great
Britain was not diminished, even by the enormous expense of the

the provinces, under the ruinous administration of their proconsuls. The virtuous Brutus lent money in Cyprus at eight-and-forty

late war.
The diminution of the capital stock of the society, or of the

per cent. as we learn from the letters of Cicero.
In a country which had acquired that full complement of riches

funds destined for the maintenance of industry, however, as it lowers

which the nature of its soil and climate, and its situation with

82

Adam Smith
respect to other countries, allowed it to acquire, which could, therefore, advance no further, and which was not going backwards,

it might do with different laws and institutions. In a country, too,
where, though the rich, or the owners of large capitals, enjoy a

both the wages of labour and the profits of stock would probably
be very low. In a country fully peopled in proportion to what

good deal of security, the poor, or the owners of small capitals,
enjoy scarce any, but are liable, under the pretence of justice, to be

either its territory could maintain, or its stock employ, the competition for employment would necessarily be so great as to reduce

pillaged and plundered at any time by the inferior mandarins, the
quantity of stock employed in all the different branches of busi-

the wages of labour to what was barely sufficient to keep up the
number of labourers, and the country being already fully peopled,

ness transacted within it, can never be equal to what the nature
and extent of that business might admit. In every different branch,

that number could never be augmented. In a country fully stocked
in proportion to all the business it had to transact, as great a quan-

the oppression of the poor must establish the monopoly of the
rich, who, by engrossing the whole trade to themselves, will be

tity of stock would be employed in every particular branch as the
nature and extent of the trade would admit. The competition,

able to make very large profits. Twelve per cent. accordingly, is
said to be the common interest of money in China, and the ordi-

therefore, would everywhere be as great, and, consequently, the
ordinary profit as low as possible.

nary profits of stock must be sufficient to afford this large interest.
A defect in the law may sometimes raise the rate of interest con-

But, perhaps, no country has ever yet arrived at this degree of
opulence. China seems to have been long stationary, and had, prob-

siderably above what the condition of the country, as to wealth or
poverty, would require. When the law does not enforce the per-

ably, long ago acquired that full complement of riches which is
consistent with the nature of its laws and institutions. But this

formance of contracts, it puts all borrowers nearly upon the same
footing with bankrupts, or people of doubtful credit, in better

complement may be much inferior to what, with other laws and
institutions, the nature of its soil, climate, and situation, might

regulated countries. The uncertainty of recovering his money makes
the lender exact the same usurious interest which is usually re-

admit of. A country which neglects or despises foreign commerce,
and which admits the vessel of foreign nations into one or two of

quired from bankrupts. Among the barbarous nations who overran the western provinces of the Roman empire, the performance

its ports only, cannot transact the same quantity of business which

of contracts was left for many ages to the faith of the contracting

83

The Wealth of Nations
parties. The courts of justice of their kings seldom intermeddled
in it. The high rate of interest which took place in those ancient

In a country which had acquired its full complement of riches,
where, in every particular branch of business, there was the great-

times, may, perhaps, be partly accounted for from this cause.
When the law prohibits interest altogether, it does not prevent

est quantity of stock that could be employed in it, as the ordinary
rate of clear profit would be very small, so the usual market rate of

it. Many people must borrow, and nobody will lend without such
a consideration for the use of their money as is suitable, not only

interest which could be afforded out of it would be so low as to
render it impossible for any but the very wealthiest people to live

to what can be made by the use of it, but to the difficulty and
danger of evading the law. The high rate of interest among all

upon the interest of their money. All people of small or middling
fortunes would be obliged to superintend themselves the employ-

Mahometan nations is accounted for by M. Montesquieu, not
from their poverty, but partly from this, and partly from the diffi-

ment of their own stocks. It would be necessary that almost every
man should be a man of business, or engage in some sort of trade.

culty of recovering the money.
The lowest ordinary rate of profit must always be something

The province of Holland seems to be approaching near to this
state. It is there unfashionable not to be a man of business. Neces-

more than what is sufficient to compensate the occasional losses
to which every employment of stock is exposed. It is this surplus

sity makes it usual for almost every man to be so, and custom
everywhere regulates fashion. As it is ridiculous not to dress, so is

only which is neat or clear profit. What is called gross profit, comprehends frequently not only this surplus, but what is retained for

it, in some measure, not to be employed like other people. As a
man of a civil profession seems awkward in a camp or a garrison,

compensating such extraordinary losses. The interest which the
borrower can afford to pay is in proportion to the clear profit

and is even in some danger of being despised there, so does an idle
man among men of business.

only. The lowest ordinary rate of interest must, in the same manner, be something more than sufficient to compensate the occa-

The highest ordinary rate of profit may be such as, in the price
of the greater part of commodities, eats up the whole of what

sional losses to which lending, even with tolerable prudence, is
exposed. Were it not, mere charity or friendship could be the only

should go to the rent of the land, and leaves only what is sufficient
to pay the labour of preparing and bringing them to market, ac-

motives for lending.

cording to the lowest rate at which labour can anywhere be paid,

84

Adam Smith
the bare subsistence of the labourer. The workman must always
have been fed in some way or other while he was about the work,

profit may, in the price of many commodities, compensate the
high wages of labour, and enable those countries to sell as cheap as

but the landlord may not always have been paid. The profits of
the trade which the servants of the East India Company carry on

their less thriving neighbours, among whom the wages of labour
may be lower.

in Bengal may not, perhaps, be very far from this rate.
The proportion which the usual market rate of interest ought to

In reality, high profits tend much more to raise the price of
work than high wages. If, in the linen manufacture, for example,

bear to the ordinary rate of clear profit, necessarily varies as profit
rises or falls. Double interest is in Great Britain reckoned what the

the wages of the different working people, the flax-dressers, the
spinners, the weavers, etc. should all of them be advanced twopence

merchants call a good, moderate, reasonable profit; terms which,
I apprehend, mean no more than a common and usual profit. In

a-day, it would be necessary to heighten the price of a piece of
linen only by a number of twopences equal to the number of people

a country where the ordinary rate of clear profit is eight or ten per
cent. it may be reasonable that one half of it should go to interest,

that had been employed about it, multiplied by the number of
days during which they had been so employed. That part of the

wherever business is carried on with borrowed money. The stock
is at the risk of the borrower, who, as it were, insures it to the

price of the commodity which resolved itself into the wages, would,
through all the different stages of the manufacture, rise only in

lender; and four or five per cent. may, in the greater part of trades,
be both a sufficient profit upon the risk of this insurance, and a

arithmetical proportion to this rise of wages. But if the profits of
all the different employers of those working people should be raised

sufficient recompence for the trouble of employing the stock. But
the proportion between interest and clear profit might not be the

five per cent. that part of the price of the commodity which resolved itself into profit would, through all the different stages of

same in countries where the ordinary rate of profit was either a
good deal lower, or a good deal higher. If it were a good deal

the manufacture, rise in geometrical proportion to this rise of profit.
The employer of the flax dressers would, in selling his flax, require

lower, one half of it, perhaps, could not be afforded for interest;
and more might be afforded if it were a good deal higher.

an additional five per cent. upon the whole value of the materials
and wages which he advanced to his workmen. The employer of

In countries which are fast advancing to riches, the low rate of

the spinners would require an additional five per cent. both upon

85

The Wealth of Nations
the advanced price of the flax, and upon the wages of the spinners. And the employer of the weavers would require alike five per

CHAPTER X

cent. both upon the advanced price of the linen-yarn, and upon
the wages of the weavers. In raising the price of commodities, the

OF WAGES AND PROFIT IN THE DIFFERENT EMPLOYMENTS OF LABOUR
AND STOCK

rise of wages operates in the same manner as simple interest does
in the accumulation of debt. The rise of profit operates like compound interest. Our merchants and master manufacturers complain much of the bad effects of high wages in raising the price,

THE WHOLE OF THE ADVANTAGES and disadvantages of the different
employments of labour and stock, must, in the same

and thereby lessening the sale of their goods, both at home and
abroad. They say nothing concerning the bad effects of high prof-

neighbourhood, be either perfectly equal, or continually tending
to equality. If, in the same neighbourhood, there was any employ-

its; they are silent with regard to the pernicious effects of their
own gains; they complain only of those of other people.

ment evidently either more or less advantageous than the rest, so
many people would crowd into it in the one case, and so many
would desert it in the other, that its advantages would soon return
to the level of other employments. This, at least, would be the case
in a society where things were left to follow their natural course,
where there was perfect liberty, and where every man was perfectly free both to choose what occupation he thought proper,
and to change it as often as he thought proper. Every man’s interest would prompt him to seek the advantageous, and to shun the
disadvantageous employment.
Pecuniary wages and profit, indeed, are everywhere in Europe
extremely different, according to the different employments of
labour and stock. But this difference arises, partly from certain

86

Adam Smith
circumstances in the employments themselves, which, either really, or at least in the imagination of men, make up for a small

is much easier. A journeyman weaver earns less than a journeyman smith. His work is not always easier, but it is much cleanlier.

pecuniary gain in some, and counterbalance a great one in others,
and partly from the policy of Europe, which nowhere leaves things

A journeyman blacksmith, though an artificer, seldom earns so
much in twelve hours, as a collier, who is only a labourer, does in

at perfect liberty.
The particular consideration of those circumstances, and of that

eight. His work is not quite so dirty, is less dangerous, and is carried on in day-light, and above ground. Honour makes a great

policy, will divide this Chapter into two parts.

part of the reward of all honourable professions. In point of pecuniary gain, all things considered, they are generally under-recom-

PART I. Inequalities arising from the nature of the employments
themselves.

pensed, as I shall endeavour to shew by and by. Disgrace has the
contrary effect. The trade of a butcher is a brutal and an odious

The five following are the principal circumstances which, so far
as I have been able to observe, make up for a small pecuniary gain

business; but it is in most places more profitable than the greater
part of common trades. The most detestable of all employments,

in some employments, and counterbalance a great one in others.
First, the agreeableness or disagreeableness of the employments

that of public executioner, is, in proportion to the quantity of
work done, better paid than any common trade whatever.

themselves; secondly, the easiness and cheapness, or the difficulty
and expense of learning them; thirdly, the constancy or incon-

Hunting and fishing, the most important employments of mankind in the rude state of society, become, in its advanced state,

stancy of employment in them; fourthly, the small or great trust
which must be reposed in those who exercise them; and, fifthly,

their most agreeable amusements, and they pursue for pleasure
what they once followed from necessity. In the advanced state of

the probability or improbability of success in them.
First, the wages of labour vary with the ease or hardship, the

society, therefore, they are all very poor people who follow as a
trade, what other people pursue as a pastime. Fishermen have been

cleanliness or dirtiness, the honourableness or dishonourableness,
of the employment. Thus in most places, take the year round, a

so since the time of Theocritus. {See Idyllium xxi.}. A poacher is
everywhere a very poor man in Great Britain. In countries where

journeyman tailor earns less than a journeyman weaver. His work

the rigour of the law suffers no poachers, the licensed hunter is

87

The Wealth of Nations
not in a much better condition. The natural taste for those employments makes more people follow them, than can live com-

sonable time, regard being had to the very uncertain duration of
human life, in the same manner as to the more certain duration of

fortably by them; and the produce of their labour, in proportion
to its quantity, comes always too cheap to market, to afford any

the machine.
The difference between the wages of skilled labour and those of

thing but the most scanty subsistence to the labourers.
Disagreeableness and disgrace affect the profits of stock in the

common labour, is founded upon this principle.
The policy of Europe considers the labour of all mechanics,

same manner as the wages of labour. The keeper of an inn or
tavern, who is never master of his own house, and who is exposed

artificers, and manufacturers, as skilled labour; and that of all country labourers us common labour. It seems to suppose that of the

to the brutality of every drunkard, exercises neither a very agreeable nor a very creditable business. But there is scarce any com-

former to be of a more nice and delicate nature than that of the
latter. It is so perhaps in some cases; but in the greater part it is

mon trade in which a small stock yields so great a profit.
Secondly, the wages of labour vary with the easiness and cheap-

quite otherwise, as I shall endeavour to shew by and by. The laws
and customs of Europe, therefore, in order to qualify any person

ness, or the difficulty and expense, of learning the business.
When any expensive machine is erected, the extraordinary work

for exercising the one species of labour, impose the necessity of an
apprenticeship, though with different degrees of rigour in differ-

to be performed by it before it is worn out, it must be expected,
will replace the capital laid out upon it, with at least the ordinary

ent places. They leave the other free and open to every body. During the continuance of the apprenticeship, the whole labour of the

profits. A man educated at the expense of much labour and time
to any of those employments which require extraordinary dexter-

apprentice belongs to his master. In the meantime he must, in
many cases, be maintained by his parents or relations, and, in

ity and skill, may be compared to one of those expensive machines. The work which he learns to perform, it must be expected,

almost all cases, must be clothed by them. Some money, too, is
commonly given to the master for teaching him his trade. They

over and above the usual wages of common labour, will replace to
him the whole expense of his education, with at least the ordinary

who cannot give money, give time, or become bound for more
than the usual number of years; a consideration which, though it

profits of an equally valuable capital. It must do this too in a rea-

is not always advantageous to the master, on account of the usual

88

Adam Smith
idleness of apprentices, is always disadvantageous to the apprentice. In country labour, on the contrary, the labourer, while he is

ness or difficulty of learning the trade in which it is employed. All
the different ways in which stock is commonly employed in great

employed about the easier, learns the more difficult parts of his
business, and his own labour maintains him through all the dif-

towns seem, in reality, to be almost equally easy and equally difficult to learn. One branch, either of foreign or domestic trade,

ferent stages of his employment. It is reasonable, therefore, that in
Europe the wages of mechanics, artificers, and manufacturers,

cannot well be a much more intricate business than another.
Thirdly, the wages of labour in different occupations vary with

should be somewhat higher than those of common labourers. They
are so accordingly, and their superior gains make them, in most

the constancy or inconstancy of employment.
Employment is much more constant in some trades than in

places, be considered as a superior rank of people. This superiority, however, is generally very small: the daily or weekly earnings

others. In the greater part of manufactures, a journeyman maybe
pretty sure of employment almost every day in the year that he is

of journeymen in the more common sorts of manufactures, such
as those of plain linen and woollen cloth, computed at an average,

able to work. A mason or bricklayer, on the contrary, can work
neither in hard frost nor in foul weather, and his employment at

are, in most places, very little more than the day-wages of common labourers. Their employment, indeed, is more steady and

all other times depends upon the occasional calls of his customers.
He is liable, in consequence, to be frequently without any. What

uniform, and the superiority of their earnings, taking the whole
year together, may be somewhat greater. It seems evidently, how-

he earns, therefore, while he is employed, must not only maintain
him while he is idle, but make him some compensation for those

ever, to be no greater than what is sufficient to compensate the
superior expense of their education. Education in the ingenious

anxious and desponding moments which the thought of so precarious a situation must sometimes occasion. Where the computed

arts, and in the liberal professions, is still more tedious and expensive. The pecuniary recompence, therefore, of painters and sculp-

earnings of the greater part of manufacturers, accordingly, are nearly
upon a level with the day-wages of common labourers, those of

tors, of lawyers and physicians, ought to be much more liberal;
and it is so accordingly.

masons and bricklayers are generally from one-half more to double
those wages. Where common labourers earn four or five shillings

The profits of stock seem to be very little affected by the easi-

a-week, masons and bricklayers frequently earn seven and eight;

89

The Wealth of Nations
where the former earn six, the latter often earn nine and ten; and
where the former earn nine and ten, as in London, the latter com-

small towns and country villages, the wages of journeymen tailors
frequently scarce equal those of common labour; but in London

monly earn fifteen and eighteen. No species of skilled labour, however, seems more easy to learn than that of masons and bricklay-

they are often many weeks without employment, particularly during the summer.

ers. Chairmen in London, during the summer season, are said
sometimes to be employed as bricklayers. The high wages of those

When the inconstancy of employment is combined with the
hardship, disagreeableness, and dirtiness of the work, it sometimes

workmen, therefore, are not so much the recompence of their skill,
as the compensation for the inconstancy of their employment.

raises the wages of the most common labour above those of the
most skilful artificers. A collier working by the piece is supposed,

A house-carpenter seems to exercise rather a nicer and a more
ingenious trade than a mason. In most places, however, for it is

at Newcastle, to earn commonly about double, and, in many parts
of Scotland, about three times, the wages of common labour. His

not universally so, his day-wages are somewhat lower. His employment, though it depends much, does not depend so entirely

high wages arise altogether from the hardship, disagreeableness,
and dirtiness of his work. His employment may, upon most occa-

upon the occasional calls of his customers; and it is not liable to be
interrupted by the weather.

sions, be as constant as he pleases. The coal-heavers in London
exercise a trade which, in hardship, dirtiness, and disagreeable-

When the trades which generally afford constant employment,
happen in a particular place not to do so, the wages of the work-

ness, almost equals that of colliers; and, from the unavoidable irregularity in the arrivals of coal-ships, the employment of the greater

men always rise a good deal above their ordinary proportion to
those of common labour. In London, almost all journeymen arti-

part of them is necessarily very inconstant. If colliers, therefore,
commonly earn double and triple the wages of common labour, it

ficers are liable to be called upon and dismissed by their masters
from day to day, and from week to week, in the same manner as

ought not to seem unreasonable that coal-heavers should sometimes earn four and five times those wages. In the inquiry made

day-labourers in other places. The lowest order of artificers, journeymen tailors, accordingly, earn their half-a-crown a-day, though

into their condition a few years ago, it was found that, at the rate
at which they were then paid, they could earn from six to ten

eighteen pence may be reckoned the wages of common labour. In

shillings a-day. Six shillings are about four times the wages of com-

90

Adam Smith
mon labour in London; and, in every particular trade, the lowest
common earnings may always be considered as those of the far

stance, necessarily enhance still further the price of their labour.
When a person employs only his own stock in trade, there is no

greater number. How extravagant soever those earnings may appear, if they were more than sufficient to compensate all the dis-

trust; and the credit which he may get from other people, depends, not upon the nature of the trade, but upon their opinion

agreeable circumstances of the business, there would soon be so
great a number of competitors, as, in a trade which has no exclu-

of his fortune, probity and prudence. The different rates of profit,
therefore, in the different branches of trade, cannot arise from the

sive privilege, would quickly reduce them to a lower rate.
The constancy or inconstancy of employment cannot affect the

different degrees of trust reposed in the traders.
Fifthly, the wages of labour in different employments vary ac-

ordinary profits of stock in any particular trade. Whether the stock
is or is not constantly employed, depends, not upon the trade, but

cording to the probability or improbability of success in them.
The probability that any particular person shall ever be quali-

the trader.
Fourthly, the wages of labour vary according to the small or

fied for the employments to which he is educated, is very different
in different occupations. In the greatest part of mechanic trades

great trust which must be reposed in the workmen.
The wages of goldsmiths and jewellers are everywhere superior

success is almost certain; but very uncertain in the liberal professions. Put your son apprentice to a shoemaker, there is little doubt

to those of many other workmen, not only of equal, but of much
superior ingenuity, on account of the precious materials with which

of his learning to make a pair of shoes; but send him to study the
law, it as at least twenty to one if he ever makes such proficiency as

they are entrusted. We trust our health to the physician, our fortune, and sometimes our life and reputation, to the lawyer and

will enable him to live by the business. In a perfectly fair lottery,
those who draw the prizes ought to gain all that is lost by those

attorney. Such confidence could not safely be reposed in people of
a very mean or low condition. Their reward must be such, there-

who draw the blanks. In a profession, where twenty fail for one
that succeeds, that one ought to gain all that should have been

fore, as may give them that rank in the society which so important
a trust requires. The long time and the great expense which must

gained by the unsuccessful twenty. The counsellor at law, who,
perhaps, at near forty years of age, begins to make something by

be laid out in their education, when combined with this circum-

his profession, ought to receive the retribution, not only of his

91

The Wealth of Nations
own so tedious and expensive education, but of that of more than
twenty others, who are never likely to make any thing by it. How

good fortune.
To excel in any profession, in which but few arrive at medioc-

extravagant soever the fees of counsellors at law may sometimes
appear, their real retribution is never equal to this. Compute, in

rity, it is the most decisive mark of what is called genius, or superior talents. The public admiration which attends upon such dis-

any particular place, what is likely to be annually gained, and what
is likely to be annually spent, by all the different workmen in any

tinguished abilities makes always a part of their reward; a greater
or smaller, in proportion as it is higher or lower in degree. It makes

common trade, such as that of shoemakers or weavers, and you
will find that the former sum will generally exceed the latter. But

a considerable part of that reward in the profession of physic; a
still greater, perhaps, in that of law; in poetry and philosophy it

make the same computation with regard to all the counsellors and
students of law, in all the different Inns of Court, and you will

makes almost the whole.
There are some very agreeable and beautiful talents, of which

find that their annual gains bear but a very small proportion to
their annual expense, even though you rate the former as high,

the possession commands a certain sort of admiration, but of which
the exercise, for the sake of gain, is considered, whether from rea-

and the latter as low, as can well be done. The lottery of the law,
therefore, is very far from being a perfectly fair lottery; and that as

son or prejudice, as a sort of public prostitution. The pecuniary
recompence, therefore, of those who exercise them in this man-

well as many other liberal and honourable professions, is, in point
of pecuniary gain, evidently under-recompensed.

ner, must be sufficient, not only to pay for the time, labour, and
expense of acquiring the talents, but for the discredit which at-

Those professions keep their level, however, with other occupations; and, notwithstanding these discouragements, all the most

tends the employment of them as the means of subsistence. The
exorbitant rewards of players, opera-singers, opera-dancers, etc.

generous and liberal spirits are eager to crowd into them. Two
different causes contribute to recommend them. First, the desire

are founded upon those two principles; the rarity and beauty of
the talents, and the discredit of employing them in this manner. It

of the reputation which attends upon superior excellence in any
of them; and, secondly, the natural confidence which every man

seems absurd at first sight, that we should despise their persons,
and yet reward their talents with the most profuse liberality. While

has, more or less, not only in his own abilities, but in his own

we do the one, however, we must of necessity do the other, Should

92

Adam Smith
the public opinion or prejudice ever alter with regard to such occupations, their pecuniary recompence would quickly diminish.

commonly sell in the market for twenty, thirty, and sometimes
forty per cent. advance. The vain hopes of gaining some of the

More people would apply to them, and the competition would
quickly reduce the price of their labour. Such talents, though far

great prizes is the sole cause of this demand. The soberest people
scarce look upon it as a folly to pay a small sum for the chance of

from being common, are by no means so rare as imagined. Many
people possess them in great perfection, who disdain to make this

gaining ten or twenty thousand pounds, though they know that
even that small sum is perhaps twenty or thirty per cent. more

use of them; and many more are capable of acquiring them, if any
thing could be made honourably by them.

than the chance is worth. In a lottery in which no prize exceeded
twenty pounds, though in other respects it approached much nearer

The over-weening conceit which the greater part of men have of
their own abilities, is an ancient evil remarked by the philosophers

to a perfectly fair one than the common state lotteries, there would
not be the same demand for tickets. In order to have a better

and moralists of all ages. Their absurd presumption in their own
good fortune has been less taken notice of. It is, however, if pos-

chance for some of the great prizes, some people purchase several
tickets; and others, small shares in a still greater number. There is

sible, still more universal. There is no man living, who, when in
tolerable health and spirits, has not some share of it. The chance

not, however, a more certain proposition in mathematics, than
that the more tickets you adventure upon, the more likely you are

of gain is by every man more or less over-valued, and the chance
of loss is by most men under-valued, and by scarce any man, who

to be a loser. Adventure upon all the tickets in the lottery, and you
lose for certain; and the greater the number of your tickets, the

is in tolerable health and spirits, valued more than it is worth.
That the chance of gain is naturally overvalued, we may learn

nearer you approach to this certainty.
That the chance of loss is frequently undervalued, and scarce

from the universal success of lotteries. The world neither ever saw,
nor ever will see, a perfectly fair lottery, or one in which the whole

ever valued more than it is worth, we may learn from the very
moderate profit of insurers. In order to make insurance, either

gain compensated the whole loss; because the undertaker could
make nothing by it. In the state lotteries, the tickets are really not

from fire or sea-risk, a trade at all, the common premium must be
sufficient to compensate the common losses, to pay the expense

worth the price which is paid by the original subscribers, and yet

of management, and to afford such a profit as might have been

93

The Wealth of Nations
drawn from an equal capital employed in any common trade. The
person who pays no more than this, evidently pays no more than

less rashness, and presumptuous contempt of the risk.
The contempt of risk, and the presumptuous hope of success,

the real value of the risk, or the lowest price at which he can reasonably expect to insure it. But though many people have made a

are in no period of life more active than at the age at which young
people choose their professions. How little the fear of misfortune

little money by insurance, very few have made a great fortune;
and, from this consideration alone, it seems evident enough that

is then capable of balancing the hope of good luck, appears still
more evidently in the readiness of the common people to enlist as

the ordinary balance of profit and loss is not more advantageous
in this than in other common trades, by which so many people

soldiers, or to go to sea, than in the eagerness of those of better
fashion to enter into what are called the liberal professions.

make fortunes. Moderate, however, as the premium of insurance
commonly is, many people despise the risk too much to care to

What a common soldier may lose is obvious enough. Without
regarding the danger, however, young volunteers never enlist so

pay it. Taking the whole kingdom at an average, nineteen houses
in twenty, or rather, perhaps, ninety-nine in a hundred, are not

readily as at the beginning of a new war; and though they have
scarce any chance of preferment, they figure to themselves, in their

insured from fire. Sea-risk is more alarming to the greater part of
people; and the proportion of ships insured to those not insured is

youthful fancies, a thousand occasions of acquiring honour and
distinction which never occur. These romantic hopes make the

much greater. Many sail, however, at all seasons, and even in time
of war, without any insurance. This may sometimes, perhaps, be

whole price of their blood. Their pay is less than that of common
labourers, and, in actual service, their fatigues are much greater.

done without any imprudence. When a great company, or even a
great merchant, has twenty or thirty ships at sea, they may, as it

The lottery of the sea is not altogether so disadvantageous as
that of the army. The son of a creditable labourer or artificer may

were, insure one another. The premium saved up on them all may
more than compensate such losses as they are likely to meet with

frequently go to sea with his father’s consent; but if he enlists as a
soldier, it is always without it. Other people see some chance of

in the common course of chances. The neglect of insurance upon
shipping, however, in the same manner as upon houses, is, in most

his making something by the one trade; nobody but himself sees
any of his making any thing by the other. The great admiral is less

cases, the effect of no such nice calculation, but of mere thought-

the object of public admiration than the great general; and the

94

Adam Smith
highest success in the sea service promises a less brilliant fortune
and reputation than equal success in the land. The same differ-

different classes of workmen are about double those of the same
classes at Edinburgh. But the sailors who sail from the port of

ence runs through all the inferior degrees of preferment in both.
By the rules of precedency, a captain in the navy ranks with a

London, seldom earn above three or four shillings a month more
than those who sail from the port of Leith, and the difference is

colonel in the army; but he does not rank with him in the common estimation. As the great prizes in the lottery are less, the smaller

frequently not so great. In time of peace, and in the merchantservice, the London price is from a guinea to about seven-and-

ones must be more numerous. Common sailors, therefore, more
frequently get some fortune and preferment than common sol-

twenty shillings the calendar month. A common labourer in London, at the rate of nine or ten shillings a week, may earn in the

diers; and the hope of those prizes is what principally recommends
the trade. Though their skill and dexterity are much superior to

calendar month from forty to five-and-forty shillings. The sailor,
indeed, over and above his pay, is supplied with provisions. Their

that of almost any artificers; and though their whole life is one
continual scene of hardship and danger; yet for all this dexterity

value, however, may not perhaps always exceed the difference between his pay and that of the common labourer; and though it

and skill, for all those hardships and dangers, while they remain in
the condition of common sailors, they receive scarce any other

sometimes should, the excess will not be clear gain to the sailor,
because he cannot share it with his wife and family, whom he

recompence but the pleasure of exercising the one and of surmounting the other. Their wages are not greater than those of

must maintain out of his wages at home.
The dangers and hair-breadth escapes of a life of adventures,

common labourers at the port which regulates the rate of seamen’s
wages. As they are continually going from port to port, the monthly

instead of disheartening young people, seem frequently to recommend a trade to them. A tender mother, among the inferior ranks

pay of those who sail from all the different ports of Great Britain,
is more nearly upon a level than that of any other workmen in

of people, is often afraid to send her son to school at a sea-port
town, lest the sight of the ships, and the conversation and adven-

those different places; and the rate of the port to and from which
the greatest number sail, that is, the port of London, regulates

tures of the sailors, should entice him to go to sea. The distant
prospect of hazards, from which we can hope to extricate our-

that of all the rest. At London, the wages of the greater part of the

selves by courage and address, is not disagreeable to us, and does

95

The Wealth of Nations
not raise the wages of labour in any employment. It is otherwise
with those in which courage and address can be of no avail. In

adventurers, of the same nature with the profit of insurers. But if
the common returns were sufficient for all this, bankruptcies would

trades which are known to be very unwholesome, the wages of
labour are always remarkably high. Unwholesomeness is a species

not be more frequent in these than in other trades.
Of the five circumstances, therefore, which vary the wages of

of disagreeableness, and its effects upon the wages of labour are to
be ranked under that general head.

labour, two only affect the profits of stock; the agreeableness or
disagreeableness of the business, and the risk or security with which

In all the different employments of stock, the ordinary rate of
profit varies more or less with the certainty or uncertainty of the

it is attended. In point of agreeableness or disagreeableness, there
is little or no difference in the far greater part of the different

returns. These are, in general, less uncertain in the inland than in
the foreign trade, and in some branches of foreign trade than in

employments of stock, but a great deal in those of labour; and the
ordinary profit of stock, though it rises with the risk, does not

others; in the trade to North America, for example, than in that to
Jamaica. The ordinary rate of profit always rises more or less with

always seem to rise in proportion to it. It should follow from all
this, that, in the same society or neighbourhood, the average and

the risk. it does not, however, seem to rise in proportion to it, or so
as to compensate it completely. Bankruptcies are most frequent in

ordinary rates of profit in the different employments of stock should
be more nearly upon a level than the pecuniary wages of the dif-

the most hazardous trades. The most hazardous of all trades, that of
a smuggler, though, when the adventure succeeds, it is likewise the

ferent sorts of labour.
They are so accordingly. The difference between the earnings of

most profitable, is the infallible road to bankruptcy. The presumptuous hope of success seems to act here as upon all other occasions,

a common labourer and those of a well employed lawyer or physician, is evidently much greater than that between the ordinary

and to entice so many adventurers into those hazardous trades, that
their competition reduces the profit below what is sufficient to com-

profits in any two different branches of trade. The apparent difference, besides, in the profits of different trades, is generally a

pensate the risk. To compensate it completely, the common returns
ought, over and above the ordinary profits of stock, not only to

deception arising from our not always distinguishing what ought
to be considered as wages, from what ought to be considered as

make up for all occasional losses, but to afford a surplus profit to the

profit.

96

Adam Smith
Apothecaries’ profit is become a bye-word, denoting something
uncommonly extravagant. This great apparent profit, however, is

of a larger capital in the business. The man, however, must not
only live by his trade, but live by it suitably to the qualifications

frequently no more than the reasonable wages of labour. The skill
of an apothecary is a much nicer and more delicate matter than

which it requires. Besides possessing a little capital, he must be
able to read, write, and account and must be a tolerable judge,

that of any artificer whatever; and the trust which is reposed in
him is of much greater importance. He is the physician of the

too, of perhaps fifty or sixty different sorts of goods, their prices,
qualities, and the markets where they are to be had cheapest. He

poor in all cases, and of the rich when the distress or danger is not
very great. His reward, therefore, ought to be suitable to his skill

must have all the knowledge, in short, that is necessary for a great
merchant, which nothing hinders him from becoming but the

and his trust; and it arises generally from the price at which he
sells his drugs. But the whole drugs which the best employed apoth-

want of a sufficient capital. Thirty or forty pounds a year cannot
be considered as too great a recompence for the labour of a person

ecary in a large market-town, will sell in a year, may not perhaps
cost him above thirty or forty pounds. Though he should sell them,

so accomplished. Deduct this from the seemingly great profits of
his capital, and little more will remain, perhaps, than the ordinary

therefore, for three or four hundred, or at a thousand per cent.
profit, this may frequently be no more than the reasonable wages

profits of stock. The greater part of the apparent profit is, in this
case too, real wages.

of his labour, charged, in the only way in which he can charge
them, upon the price of his drugs. The greater part of the appar-

The difference between the apparent profit of the retail and that
of the wholesale trade, is much less in the capital than in small

ent profit is real wages disguised in the garb of profit.
In a small sea-port town, a little grocer will make forty or fifty

towns and country villages. Where ten thousand pounds can be
employed in the grocery trade, the wages of the grocer’s labour

per cent. upon a stock of a single hundred pounds, while a considerable wholesale merchant in the same place will scarce make eight

must be a very trifling addition to the real profits of so great a
stock. The apparent profits of the wealthy retailer, therefore, are

or ten per cent. upon a stock of ten thousand. The trade of the
grocer may be necessary for the conveniency of the inhabitants,

there more nearly upon a level with those of the wholesale merchant. It is upon this account that goods sold by retail are gener-

and the narrowness of the market may not admit the employment

ally as cheap, and frequently much cheaper, in the capital than in

97

The Wealth of Nations
small towns and country villages. Grocery goods, for example, are
generally much cheaper; bread and butchers’ meat frequently as

country villages, yet great fortunes are frequently acquired from
small beginnings in the former, and scarce ever in the latter. In

cheap. It costs no more to bring grocery goods to the great town
than to the country village; but it costs a great deal more to bring

small towns and country villages, on account of the narrowness of
the market, trade cannot always be extended as stock extends. In

corn and cattle, as the greater part of them must be brought from
a much greater distance. The prime cost of grocery goods, there-

such places, therefore, though the rate of a particular person’s profits
may be very high, the sum or amount of them can never be very

fore, being the same in both places, they are cheapest where the
least profit is charged upon them. The prime cost of bread and

great, nor consequently that of his annual accumulation. In great
towns, on the contrary, trade can be extended as stock increases,

butchers’ meat is greater in the great town than in the country
village; and though the profit is less, therefore they are not always

and the credit of a frugal and thriving man increases much faster
than his stock. His trade is extended in proportion to the amount

cheaper there, but often equally cheap. In such articles as bread
and butchers’ meat, the same cause which diminishes apparent

of both; and the sum or amount of his profits is in proportion to
the extent of his trade, and his annual accumulation in propor-

profit, increases prime cost. The extent of the market, by giving
employment to greater stocks, diminishes apparent profit; but by

tion to the amount of his profits. It seldom happens, however,
that great fortunes are made, even in great towns, by any one regu-

requiring supplies from a greater distance, it increases prime cost.
This diminution of the one and increase of the other, seem, in

lar, established, and well-known branch of business, but in consequence of a long life of industry, frugality, and attention. Sudden

most cases, nearly to counterbalance one another; which is probably the reason that, though the prices of corn and cattle are com-

fortunes, indeed, are sometimes made in such places, by what is
called the trade of speculation. The speculative merchant exercises

monly very different in different parts of the kingdom, those of
bread and butchers’ meat are generally very nearly the same through

no one regular, established, or well-known branch of business. He
is a corn merchant this year, and a wine merchant the next, and a

the greater part of it.
Though the profits of stock, both in the wholesale and retail

sugar, tobacco, or tea merchant the year after. He enters into every
trade, when he foresees that it is likely to lie more than commonly

trade, are generally less in the capital than in small towns and

profitable, and he quits it when he foresees that its profits are

98

Adam Smith
likely to return to the level of other trades. His profits and losses,
therefore, can bear no regular proportion to those of any one es-

which are well known, and have been long established in the
neighbourhood.

tablished and well-known branch of business. A bold adventurer
may sometimes acquire a considerable fortune by two or three

Where all other circumstances are equal, wages are generally
higher in new than in old trades. When a projector attempts to

successful speculations, but is just as likely to lose one by two or
three unsuccessful ones. This trade can be carried on nowhere but

establish a new manufacture, he must at first entice his workmen
from other employments, by higher wages than they can either

in great towns. It is only in places of the most extensive commerce
and correspondence that the intelligence requisite for it can be

earn in their own trades, or than the nature of his work would
otherwise require; and a considerable time must pass away before

had.
The five circumstances above mentioned, though they occasion

he can venture to reduce them to the common level. Manufactures for which the demand arises altogether from fashion and

considerable inequalities in the wages of labour and profits of stock,
occasion none in the whole of the advantages and disadvantages,

fancy, are continually changing, and seldom last long enough to
be considered as old established manufactures. Those, on the con-

real or imaginary, of the different employments of either. The nature of those circumstances is such, that they make up for a small

trary, for which the demand arises chiefly from use or necessity,
are less liable to change, and the same form or fabric may con-

pecuniary gain in some, and counterbalance a great one in others.
In order, however, that this equality may take place in the whole

tinue in demand for whole centuries together. The wages of labour,
therefore, are likely to be higher in manufactures of the former,

of their advantages or disadvantages, three things are requisite,
even where there is the most perfect freedom. First the employ-

than in those of the latter kind. Birmingham deals chiefly in manufactures of the former kind; Sheffield in those of the latter; and

ments must be well known and long established in the
neighbourhood; secondly, they must be in their ordinary, or what

the wages of labour in those two different places are said to be
suitable to this difference in the nature of their manufactures.

may be called their natural state; and, thirdly, they must be the
sole or principal employments of those who occupy them.

The establishment of any new manufacture, of any new branch
of commerce, or of any new practice in agriculture, is always a

First, This equality can take place only in those employments

speculation from which the projector promises himself extraordi-

99

The Wealth of Nations
nary profits. These profits sometimes are very great, and sometimes, more frequently, perhaps, they are quite otherwise; but, in

their own trade, are contented with smaller wages than would
otherwise be suitable to the nature of their employment.

general, they bear no regular proportion to those of other old trades
in the neighbourhood. If the project succeeds, they are commonly

The profits of stock vary with the price of the commodities in
which it is employed. As the price of any commodity rises above

at first very high. When the trade or practice becomes thoroughly
established and well known, the competition reduces them to the

the ordinary or average rate, the profits of at least some part of the
stock that is employed in bringing it to market, rise above their

level of other trades.
Secondly, this equality in the whole of the advantages and dis-

proper level, and as it falls they sink below it. All commodities are
more or less liable to variations of price, but some are much more

advantages of the different employments of labour and stock, can
take place only in the ordinary, or what may be called the natural

so than others. In all commodities which are produced by human
industry, the quantity of industry annually employed is necessar-

state of those employments.
The demand for almost every different species of labour is some-

ily regulated by the annual demand, in such a manner that the
average annual produce may, as nearly as possible, be equal to the

times greater, and sometimes less than usual. In the one case, the
advantages of the employment rise above, in the other they fall

average annual consumption. In some employments, it has already
been observed, the same quantity of industry will always produce

below the common level. The demand for country labour is greater
at hay-time and harvest than during the greater part of the year;

the same, or very nearly the same quantity of commodities. In the
linen or woollen manufactures, for example, the same number of

and wages rise with the demand. In time of war, when forty or
fifty thousand sailors are forced from the merchant service into

hands will annually work up very nearly the same quantity of linen
and woollen cloth. The variations in the market price of such com-

that of the king, the demand for sailors to merchant ships necessarily rises with their scarcity; and their wages, upon such occa-

modities, therefore, can arise only from some accidental variation
in the demand. A public mourning raises the price of black cloth.

sions, commonly rise from a guinea and seven-and-twenty shillings to forty shilling’s and three pounds a-month. In a decaying

But as the demand for most sorts of plain linen and woollen cloth
is pretty uniform, so is likewise the price. But there are other em-

manufacture, on the contrary, many workmen, rather than quit

ployments in which the same quantity of industry will not always

100

Adam Smith
produce the same quantity of commodities. The same quantity of
industry, for example, will, in different years, produce very differ-

their master is a house, a small garden for pot-herbs, as much
grass as will feed a cow, and, perhaps, an acre or two of bad arable

ent quantities of corn, wine, hops, sugar tobacco, etc. The price of
such commodities, therefore, varies not only with the variations

land. When their master has occasion for their labour, he gives
them, besides, two pecks of oatmeal a-week, worth about sixteen

of demand, but with the much greater and more frequent variations of quantity, and is consequently extremely fluctuating; but

pence sterling. During a great part of the year, he has little or no
occasion for their labour, and the cultivation of their own little

the profit of some of the dealers must necessarily fluctuate with
the price of the commodities. The operations of the speculative

possession is not sufficient to occupy the time which is left at their
own disposal. When such occupiers were more numerous than

merchant are principally employed about such commodities. He
endeavours to buy them up when he foresees that their price is

they are at present, they are said to have been willing to give their
spare time for a very small recompence to any body, and to have

likely to rise, and to sell them when it is likely to fall.
Thirdly, this equality in the whole of the advantages and disad-

wrought for less wages than other labourers. In ancient times, they
seem to have been common all over Europe. In countries ill culti-

vantages of the different employments of labour and stock, can
take place only in such as are the sole or principal employments of

vated, and worse inhabited, the greater part of landlords and farmers could not otherwise provide themselves with the extraordinary

those who occupy them.
When a person derives his subsistence from one employment,

number of hands which country labour requires at certain seasons. The daily or weekly recompence which such labourers occa-

which does not occupy the greater part of his time, in the intervals
of his leisure he is often willing to work at another for less wages

sionally received from their masters, was evidently not the whole
price of their labour. Their small tenement made a considerable

than would otherwise suit the nature of the employment.
There still subsists, in many parts of Scotland, a set of people

part of it. This daily or weekly recompence, however, seems to
have been considered as the whole of it, by many writers who have

called cottars or cottagers, though they were more frequent some
years ago than they are now. They are a sort of out-servants of the

collected the prices of labour and provisions in ancient times, and
who have taken pleasure in representing both as wonderfully low.

landlords and farmers. The usual reward which they receive from

The produce of such labour comes frequently cheaper to mar-

101

The Wealth of Nations
ket than would otherwise be suitable to its nature. Stockings, in
many parts of Scotland, are knit much cheaper than they can any-

capital of a very rich one. There is no city in Europe, I believe, in
which house-rent is dearer than in London, and yet I know no

where be wrought upon the loom. They are the work of servants
and labourers who derive the principal part of their subsistence

capital in which a furnished apartment can be hired so cheap.
Lodging is not only much cheaper in London than in Paris; it is

from some other employment. More than a thousand pair of Shetland stockings are annually imported into Leith, of which the

much cheaper than in Edinburgh, of the same degree of goodness;
and, what may seem extraordinary, the dearness of house-rent is

price is from fivepence to seven-pence a pair. At Lerwick, the small
capital of the Shetland islands, tenpence a-day, I have been as-

the cause of the cheapness of lodging. The dearness of house-rent
in London arises, not only from those causes which render it dear

sured, is a common price of common labour. In the same islands,
they knit worsted stockings to the value of a guinea a pair and

in all great capitals, the dearness of labour, the dearness of all the
materials of building, which must generally be brought from a

upwards.
The spinning of linen yarn is carried on in Scotland nearly in

great distance, and, above all, the dearness of ground-rent, every
landlord acting the part of a monopolist, and frequently exacting

the same way as the knitting of stockings, by servants, who are
chiefly hired for other purposes. They earn but a very scanty sub-

a higher rent for a single acre of bad land in a town, than can be
had for a hundred of the best in the country; but it arises in part

sistence, who endeavour to get their livelihood by either of those
trades. In most parts of Scotland, she is a good spinner who can

from the peculiar manners and customs of the people, which oblige
every master of a family to hire a whole house from top to bot-

earn twentypence a-week.
In opulent countries, the market is generally so extensive, that

tom. A dwelling-house in England means every thing that is contained under the same roof. In France, Scotland, and many other

any one trade is sufficient to employ the whole labour and stock
of those who occupy it. Instances of people living by one employ-

parts of Europe, it frequently means no more than a single storey.
A tradesman in London is obliged to hire a whole house in that

ment, and, at the same time, deriving some little advantage from
another, occur chiefly in pour countries. The following instance,

part of the town where his customers live. His shop is upon the
ground floor, and he and his family sleep in the garret; and he

however, of something of the same kind, is to be found in the

endeavours to pay a part of his house-rent by letting the two middle

102

Adam Smith
storeys to lodgers. He expects to maintain his family by his trade,
and not by his lodgers. Whereas at Paris and Edinburgh, people

wise be disposed to enter into them.
The exclusive privileges of corporations are the principal means

who let lodgings have commonly no other means of subsistence;
and the price of the lodging must pay, not only the rent of the

it makes use of for this purpose.
The exclusive privilege of an incorporated trade necessarily re-

house, but the whole expense of the family.

strains the competition, in the town where it is established, to
those who are free of the trade. To have served an apprenticeship

PART II. — Inequalities occasioned by the Policy of Europe.
Such are the inequalities in the whole of the advantages and

in the town, under a master properly qualified, is commonly the
necessary requisite for obtaining this freedom. The bye-laws of

disadvantages of the different employments of labour and stock,
which the defect of any of the three requisites above mentioned

the corporation regulate sometimes the number of apprentices
which any master is allowed to have, and almost always the num-

must occasion, even where there is the most perfect liberty. But
the policy of Europe, by not leaving things at perfect liberty, occa-

ber of years which each apprentice is obliged to serve. The intention of both regulations is to restrain the competition to a much

sions other inequalities of much greater importance.
It does this chiefly in the three following ways. First, by restrain-

smaller number than might otherwise be disposed to enter into
the trade. The limitation of the number of apprentices restrains it

ing the competition in some employments to a smaller number
than would otherwise be disposed to enter into them; secondly,

directly. A long term of apprenticeship restrains it more indirectly,
but as effectually, by increasing the expense of education.

by increasing it in others beyond what it naturally would be; and,
thirdly, by obstructing the free circulation of labour and stock,

In Sheffield, no master cutler can have more than one apprentice at a time, by a bye-law of the corporation. In Norfolk and

both from employment to employment, and from place to place.
First, The policy of Europe occasions a very important inequal-

Norwich, no master weaver can have more than two apprentices,
under pain of forfeiting five pounds a-month to the king. No

ity in the whole of the advantages and disadvantages of the different employments of labour and stock, by restraining the competi-

master hatter can have more than two apprentices anywhere in
England, or in the English plantations, under pain of forfeiting;

tion in some employments to a smaller number than might other-

five pounds a-month, half to the king, and half to him who shall

103

The Wealth of Nations
sue in any court of record. Both these regulations, though they
have been confirmed by a public law of the kingdom, are evi-

necessary to entitle him to become a master, teacher, or doctor
(words anciently synonymous), in the liberal arts, and to have

dently dictated by the same corporation-spirit which enacted the
bye-law of Sheffield. The silk-weavers in London had scarce been

scholars or apprentices (words likewise originally synonymous) to
study under him.

incorporated a year, when they enacted a bye-law, restraining any
master from having more than two apprentices at a time. It re-

By the 5th of Elizabeth, commonly called the Statute of Apprenticeship, it was enacted, that no person should, for the future,

quired a particular act of parliament to rescind this bye-law.
Seven years seem anciently to have been, all over Europe, the

exercise any trade, craft, or mystery, at that time exercised in England, unless he had previously served to it an apprenticeship of

usual term established for the duration of apprenticeships in the
greater part of incorporated trades. All such incorporations were

seven years at least; and what before had been the bye-law of many
particular corporations, became in England the general and pub-

anciently called universities, which, indeed, is the proper Latin
name for any incorporation whatever. The university of smiths,

lic law of all trades carried on in market towns. For though the
words of the statute are very general, and seem plainly to include

the university of tailors, etc. are expressions which we commonly
meet with in the old charters of ancient towns. When those par-

the whole kingdom, by interpretation its operation has been limited to market towns; it having been held that, in country villages,

ticular incorporations, which are now peculiarly called universities, were first established, the term of years which it was necessary

a person may exercise several different trades, though he has not
served a seven years apprenticeship to each, they being necessary

to study, in order to obtain the degree of master of arts, appears
evidently to have been copied from the term of apprenticeship in

for the conveniency of the inhabitants, and the number of people
frequently not being sufficient to supply each with a particular set

common trades, of which the incorporations were much more
ancient. As to have wrought seven years under a master properly

of hands. By a strict interpretation of the words, too, the operation of this statute has been limited to those trades which were

qualified, was necessary, in order to entitle my person to become a
master, and to have himself apprentices in a common trade; so to

established in England before the 5th of Elizabeth, and has never
been extended to such as have been introduced since that time.

have studied seven years under a master properly qualified, was

This limitation has given occasion to several distinctions, which,

104

Adam Smith
considered as rules of police, appear as foolish as can well be imagined. It has been adjudged, for example, that a coach-maker can

deemed by paying a small fine. In most towns, too, a very small fine
is sufficient to purchase the freedom of any corporation. The weav-

neither himself make nor employ journeymen to make his coachwheels, but must buy them of a master wheel-wright; this latter

ers of linen and hempen cloth, the principal manufactures of the
country, as well as all other artificers subservient to them, wheel-

trade having been exercised in England before the 5th of Elizabeth. But a wheel-wright, though he has never served an appren-

makers, reel-makers, etc. may exercise their trades in any town-corporate without paying any fine. In all towns-corporate, all persons

ticeship to a coachmaker, may either himself make or employ journeymen to make coaches; the trade of a coachmaker not being

are free to sell butchers’ meat upon any lawful day of the week.
Three years is, in Scotland, a common term of apprenticeship, even

within the statute, because not exercised in England at the time
when it was made. The manufactures of Manchester, Birming-

in some very nice trades; and, in general, I know of no country in
Europe, in which corporation laws are so little oppressive.

ham, and Wolverhampton, are many of them, upon this account,
not within the statute, not having been exercised in England be-

The property which every man has in his own labour, as it is the
original foundation of all other property, so it is the most sacred

fore the 5th of Elizabeth.
In France, the duration of apprenticeships is different in differ-

and inviolable. The patrimony of a poor man lies in the strength
and dexterity of his hands; and to hinder him from employing

ent towns and in different trades. In Paris, five years is the term
required in a great number; but, before any person can be quali-

this strength and dexterity in what manner he thinks proper, without injury to his neighbour, is a plain violation of this most sacred

fied to exercise the trade as a master, he must, in many of them,
serve five years more as a journeyman. During this latter term, he

property. It is a manifest encroachment upon the just liberty, both
of the workman, and of those who might be disposed to employ

is called the companion of his master, and the term itself is called
his companionship.

him. As it hinders the one from working at what he thinks proper,
so it hinders the others from employing whom they think proper.

In Scotland, there is no general law which regulates universally
the duration of apprenticeships. The term is different in different

To judge whether he is fit to be employed, may surely be trusted
to the discretion of the employers, whose interest it so much con-

corporations. Where it is long, a part of it may generally be re-

cerns. The affected anxiety of the lawgiver, lest they should em-

105

The Wealth of Nations
ploy an improper person, is evidently as impertinent as it is oppressive.

apprentices from public charities are generally bound for more
than the usual number of years, and they generally turn out very

The institution of long apprenticeships can give no security that
insufficient workmanship shall not frequently be exposed to pub-

idle and worthless.
Apprenticeships were altogether unknown to the ancients. The

lic sale. When this is done, it is generally the effect of fraud, and
not of inability; and the longest apprenticeship can give no secu-

reciprocal duties of master and apprentice make a considerable article in every modern code. The Roman law is perfectly silent with

rity against fraud. Quite different regulations are necessary to prevent this abuse. The sterling mark upon plate, and the stamps

regard to them. I know no Greek or Latin word (I might venture, I
believe, to assert that there is none) which expresses the idea we now

upon linen and woollen cloth, give the purchaser much greater
security than any statute of apprenticeship. He generally looks at

annex to the word apprentice, a servant bound to work at a particular trade for the benefit of a master, during a term of years, upon

these, but never thinks it worth while to enquire whether the workman had served a seven years apprenticeship.

condition that the master shall teach him that trade.
Long apprenticeships are altogether unnecessary. The arts, which

The institution of long apprenticeships has no tendency to form
young people to industry. A journeyman who works by the piece

are much superior to common trades, such as those of making
clocks and watches, contain no such mystery as to require a long

is likely to be industrious, because he derives a benefit from every
exertion of his industry. An apprentice is likely to be idle, and

course of instruction. The first invention of such beautiful machines, indeed, and even that of some of the instruments employed

almost always is so, because he has no immediate interest to be
otherwise. In the inferior employments, the sweets of labour con-

in making them, must no doubt have been the work of deep
thought and long time, and may justly be considered as among

sist altogether in the recompence of labour. They who are soonest
in a condition to enjoy the sweets of it, are likely soonest to con-

the happiest efforts of human ingenuity. But when both have been
fairly invented, and are well understood, to explain to any young

ceive a relish for it, and to acquire the early habit of industry. A
young man naturally conceives an aversion to labour, when for a

man, in the completest manner, how to apply the instruments,
and how to construct the machines, cannot well require more than

long time he receives no benefit from it. The boys who are put out

the lessons of a few weeks; perhaps those of a few days might be

106

Adam Smith
sufficient. In the common mechanic trades, those of a few days
might certainly be sufficient. The dexterity of hand, indeed, even

ration, no other authority in ancient times was requisite, in many
parts of Europe, but that of the town-corporate in which it was

in common trades, cannot be acquired without much practice
and experience. But a young man would practice with much more

established. In England, indeed, a charter from the king was likewise necessary. But this prerogative of the crown seems to have

diligence and attention, if from the beginning he wrought as a
journeyman, being paid in proportion to the little work which he

been reserved rather for extorting money from the subject, than
for the defence of the common liberty against such oppressive

could execute, and paying in his turn for the materials which he
might sometimes spoil through awkwardness and inexperience.

monopolies. Upon paying a fine to the king, the charter seems
generally to have been readily granted; and when any particular

His education would generally in this way be more effectual, and
always less tedious and expensive. The master, indeed, would be a

class of artificers or traders thought proper to act as a corporation,
without a charter, such adulterine guilds, as they were called, were

loser. He would lose all the wages of the apprentice, which he now
saves, for seven years together. In the end, perhaps, the apprentice

not always disfranchised upon that account, but obliged to fine
annually to the king, for permission to exercise their usurped privi-

himself would be a loser. In a trade so easily learnt he would have
more competitors, and his wages, when he came to be a complete

leges {See Madox Firma Burgi p. 26 etc.}. The immediate inspection of all corporations, and of the bye-laws which they might

workman, would be much less than at present. The same increase
of competition would reduce the profits of the masters, as well as

think proper to enact for their own government, belonged to the
town-corporate in which they were established; and whatever dis-

the wages of workmen. The trades, the crafts, the mysteries, would
all be losers. But the public would be a gainer, the work of all

cipline was exercised over them, proceeded commonly, not from
the king, but from that greater incorporation of which those sub-

artificers coming in this way much cheaper to market.
It is to prevent his reduction of price, and consequently of wages

ordinate ones were only parts or members.
The government of towns-corporate was altogether in the hands

and profit, by restraining that free competition which would most
certainly occasion it, that all corporations, and the greater part of

of traders and artificers, and it was the manifest interest of every
particular class of them, to prevent the market from being over-

corporation laws have been established. In order to erect a corpo-

stocked, as they commonly express it, with their own particular

107

The Wealth of Nations
species of industry; which is in reality to keep it always
understocked. Each class was eager to establish regulations proper

mented by the wages of the carriers or sailors, and by the profits of
the merchants who employ them. In what is gained upon the first

for this purpose, and, provided it was allowed to do so, was willing to consent that every other class should do the same. In conse-

of those branches of commerce, consists the advantage which the
town makes by its manufactures; in what is gained upon the sec-

quence of such regulations, indeed, each class was obliged to buy
the goods they had occasion for from every other within the town,

ond, the advantage of its inland and foreign trade. The wages of
the workmen, and the profits of their different employers, make

somewhat dearer than they otherwise might have done. But, in
recompence, they were enabled to sell their own just as much dearer;

up the whole of what is gained upon both. Whatever regulations,
therefore, tend to increase those wages and profits beyond what

so that, so far it was as broad as long, as they say; and in the
dealings of the different classes within the town with one another,

they otherwise: would be, tend to enable the town to purchase,
with a smaller quantity of its labour, the produce of a greater quan-

none of them were losers by these regulations. But in their dealings with the country they were all great gainers; and in these

tity of the labour of the country. They give the traders and artificers in the town an advantage over the landlords, farmers, and

latter dealings consist the whole trade which supports and enriches every town.

labourers, in the country, and break down that natural equality
which would otherwise take place in the commerce which is car-

Every town draws its whole subsistence, and all the materials of
its industry, from the: country. It pays for these chiefly in two

ried on between them. The whole annual produce of the labour of
the society is annually divided between those two different sets of

ways. First, by sending back to the country a part of those materials wrought up and manufactured; in which case, their price is

people. By means of those regulations, a greater share of it is given
to the inhabitants of the town than would otherwise fall to them,

augmented by the wages of the workmen, and the profits of their
masters or immediate employers; secondly, by sending to it a part

and a less to those of ’ the country.
The price which the town really pays for the provisions and

both of the rude and manufactured produce, either of other countries, or of distant parts of the same country, imported into the

materials annually imported into it, is the quantity of manufactures and other goods annually exported from it. The dearer the

town; in which case, too, the original price of those goods is aug-

latter are sold, the cheaper the former are bought. The industry of

108

Adam Smith
the town becomes more, and that of the country less advantageous.

and agreements, to prevent that free competition which they cannot prohibit by bye-laws. The trades which employ but a small

That the industry which is carried on in towns is, everywhere in
Europe, more advantageous than that which is carried on in the

number of hands, run most easily into such combinations. Halfa-dozen wool-combers, perhaps, are necessary to keep a thousand

country, without entering into any very nice computations, we may
satisfy ourselves by one very simple and obvious observation. In

spinners and weavers at work. By combining not to take apprentices, they can not only engross the employment, but reduce the

every country of Europe, we find at least a hundred people who
have acquired great fortunes, from small beginnings, by trade and

whole manufacture into a sort of slavery to themselves, and raise
the price of their labour much above what is due to the nature of

manufactures, the industry which properly belongs to towns, for
one who has done so by that which properly belongs to the country,

their work.
The inhabitants of the country, dispersed in distant places, can-

the raising of rude produce by the improvement and cultivation of
land. Industry, therefore, must be better rewarded, the wages of labour

not easily combine together. They have not only never been incorporated, but the incorporation spirit never has prevailed among

and the profits of stock must evidently be greater, in the one situation than in the other. But stock and labour naturally seek the most

them. No apprenticeship has ever been thought necessary to qualify
for husbandry, the great trade of the country. After what are called

advantageous employment. They naturally, therefore, resort as much
as they can to the town, and desert the country.

the fine arts, and the liberal professions, however, there is perhaps
no trade which requires so great a variety of knowledge and expe-

The inhabitants of a town being collected into one place, can
easily combine together. The most insignificant trades carried on

rience. The innumerable volumes which have been written upon
it in all languages, may satisfy us, that among the wisest and most

in towns have, accordingly, in some place or other, been incorporated; and even where they have never been incorporated, yet the

learned nations, it has never been regarded as a matter very easily
understood. And from all those volumes we shall in vain attempt

corporation-spirit, the jealousy of strangers, the aversion to take
apprentices, or to communicate the secret of their trade, generally

to collect that knowledge of its various and complicated operations which is commonly possessed even by the common farmer;

prevail in them, and often teach them, by voluntary associations

how contemptuously soever the very contemptible authors of some

109

The Wealth of Nations
of them may sometimes affect to speak of him. There is scarce any
common mechanic trade, on the contrary, of which all the opera-

erally regarded as the pattern of stupidity and ignorance, is seldom defective in this judgment and discretion. He is less accus-

tions may not be as completely and distinctly explained in a pamphlet of a very few pages, as it is possible for words illustrated by

tomed, indeed, to social intercourse, than the mechanic who lives
in a town. His voice and language are more uncouth, and more

figures to explain them. In the history of the arts, now publishing
by the French Academy of Sciences, several of them are actually

difficult to be understood by those who are not used to them. His
understanding, however, being accustomed to consider a greater

explained in this manner. The direction of operations, besides,
which must be varied with every change of the weather, as well as

variety of objects, is generally much superior to that of the other,
whose whole attention, from morning till night, is commonly

with many other accidents, requires much more judgment and
discretion, than that of those which are always the same, or very

occupied in performing one or two very simple operations. How
much the lower ranks of people in the country are really superior

nearly the same.
Not only the art of the farmer, the general direction of the op-

to those of the town, is well known to every man whom either
business or curiosity has led to converse much with both. In China

erations of husbandry, but many inferior branches of country
labour require much more skill and experience than the greater

and Indostan, accordingly, both the rank and the wages of country labourers are said to be superior to those of the greater part of

part of mechanic trades. The man who works upon brass and iron,
works with instruments, and upon materials of which the temper

artificers and manufacturers. They would probably be so everywhere, if corporation laws and the corporation spirit did not pre-

is always the same, or very nearly the same. But the man who
ploughs the ground with a team of horses or oxen, works with

vent it.
The superiority which the industry of the towns has everywhere

instruments of which the health, strength, and temper, are very
different upon different occasions. The condition of the materials

in Europe over that of the country, is not altogether owing to
corporations and corporation laws. It is supported by many other

which he works upon, too, is as variable as that of the instruments
which he works with, and both require to be managed with much

regulations. The high duties upon foreign manufactures, and upon
all goods imported by alien merchants, all tend to the same pur-

judgment and discretion. The common ploughman, though gen-

pose. Corporation laws enable the inhabitants of towns to raise

110

Adam Smith
their prices, without fearing to be undersold by the free competition of their own countrymen. Those other regulations secure them

reduces the profit. The lowering of profit in the town forces out
stock to the country, where, by creating a new demand for coun-

equally against that of foreigners. The enhancement of price occasioned by both is everywhere finally paid by the landlords, farm-

try labour, it necessarily raises its wages. It then spreads itself, if I
my say so, over the face of the land, and, by being employed in

ers, and labourers, of the country, who have seldom opposed the
establishment of such monopolies. They have commonly neither

agriculture, is in part restored to the country, at the expense of
which, in a great measure, it had originally been accumulated in

inclination nor fitness to enter into combinations; and the clamour
and sophistry of merchants and manufacturers easily persuade

the town. That everywhere in Europe the greatest improvements
of the country have been owing to such over flowings of the stock

them, that the private interest of a part, and of a subordinate part,
of the society, is the general interest of the whole.

originally accumulated in the towns, I shall endeavour to shew
hereafter, and at the same time to demonstrate, that though some

In Great Britain, the superiority of the industry of the towns
over that of the country seems to have been greater formerly than

countries have, by this course, attained to a considerable degree of
opulence, it is in itself necessarily slow, uncertain, liable to be dis-

in the present times. The wages of country labour approach nearer
to those of manufacturing labour, and the profits of stock em-

turbed and interrupted by innumerable accidents, and, in every
respect, contrary to the order of nature and of reason The inter-

ployed in agriculture to those of trading and manufacturing stock,
than they are said to have none in the last century, or in the begin-

ests, prejudices, laws, and customs, which have given occasion to
it, I shall endeavour to explain as fully and distinctly as I can in

ning of the present. This change may be regarded as the necessary,
though very late consequence of the extraordinary encouragement

the third and fourth books of this Inquiry.
People of the same trade seldom meet together, even for merri-

given to the industry of the towns. The stocks accumulated in
them come in time to be so great, that it can no longer be em-

ment and diversion, but the conversation ends in a conspiracy
against the public, or in some contrivance to raise prices. It is

ployed with the ancient profit in that species of industry which is
peculiar to them. That industry has its limits like every other; and

impossible, indeed, to prevent such meetings, by any law which
either could be executed, or would be consistent with liberty and

the increase of stock, by increasing the competition, necessarily

justice. But though the law cannot hinder people of the same trade

111

The Wealth of Nations
from sometimes assembling together, it ought to do nothing to
facilitate such assemblies, much less to render them necessary.

their employment which restrains his frauds and corrects his negligence. An exclusive corporation necessarily weakens the force of

A regulation which obliges all those of the same trade in a particular town to enter their names and places of abode in a public

this discipline. A particular set of workmen must then be employed, let them behave well or ill. It is upon this account that, in

register, facilitates such assemblies. It connects individuals who
might never otherwise be known to one another, and gives every

many large incorporated towns, no tolerable workmen are to be
found, even in some of the most necessary trades. If you would

man of the trade a direction where to find every other man of it.
A regulation which enables those of the same trade to tax them-

have your work tolerably executed, it must be done in the suburbs, where the workmen, having no exclusive privilege, have noth-

selves, in order to provide for their poor, their sick, their widows
and orphans, by giving them a common interest to manage, ren-

ing but their character to depend upon, and you must then smuggle
it into the town as well as you can.

ders such assemblies necessary.
An incorporation not only renders them necessary, but makes

It is in this manner that the policy of Europe, by restraining the
competition in some employments to a smaller number than would

the act of the majority binding upon the whole. In a free trade, an
effectual combination cannot be established but by the unani-

otherwise be disposed to enter into them, occasions a very important inequality in the whole of the advantages and disadvantages

mous consent of every single trader, and it cannot last longer than
every single trader continues of the same mind. The majority of a

of the different employments of labour and stock.
Secondly, The policy of Europe, by increasing the competition

corporation can enact a bye-law, with proper penalties, which will
limit the competition more effectually and more durably than any

in some employments beyond what it naturally would be, occasions another inequality, of an opposite kind, in the whole of the

voluntary combination whatever.
The pretence that corporations are necessary for the better gov-

advantages and disadvantages of the different employments of
labour and stock.

ernment of the trade, is without any foundation. The real and
effectual discipline which is exercised over a workman, is not that

It has been considered as of so much importance that a proper
number of young people should be educated for certain profes-

of his corporation, but that of his customers. It is the fear of losing

sions, that sometimes the public, and sometimes the piety of pri-

112

Adam Smith
vate founders, have established many pensions, scholarships, exhibitions, bursaries, etc. for this purpose, which draw many more

tity of silver as a shilling of our present money, was declared to be
the pay of a master mason; and threepence a-day, equal to

people into those trades than could otherwise pretend to follow
them. In all Christian countries, I believe, the education of the

ninepence of our present money, that of a journeyman mason.
{See the Statute of Labourers, 25, Ed. III.} The wages of both

greater part of churchmen is paid for in this manner. Very few of
them are educated altogether at their own expense. The long, te-

these labourer’s, therefore, supposing them to have been constantly
employed, were much superior to those of the curate. The wages

dious, and expensive education, therefore, of those who are, will
not always procure them a suitable reward, the church being

of the master mason, supposing him to have been without employment one-third of the year, would have fully equalled them.

crowded with people, who, in order to get employment, are willing to accept of a much smaller recompence than what such an

By the 12th of Queen Anne, c. 12. it is declared, “That whereas,
for want of sufficient maintenance and encouragement to curates,

education would otherwise have entitled them to; and in this
manner the competition of the poor takes away the reward of the

the cures have, in several places, been meanly supplied, the bishop
is, therefore, empowered to appoint, by writing under his hand

rich. It would be indecent, no doubt, to compare either a curate
or a chaplain with a journeyman in any common trade. The pay

and seal, a sufficient certain stipend or allowance, not exceeding
fifty, and not less than twenty pounds a-year”. Forty pounds a-

of a curate or chaplain, however, may very properly be considered
as of the same nature with the wages of a journeyman. They are all

year is reckoned at present very good pay for a curate; and, notwithstanding this act of parliament, there are many curacies un-

three paid for their work according to the contract which they
may happen to make with their respective superiors. Till after the

der twenty pounds a-year. There are journeymen shoemakers in
London who earn forty pounds a-year, and there is scarce an in-

middle of the fourteenth century, five merks, containing about as
much silver as ten pounds of our present money, was in England

dustrious workman of any kind in that metropolis who does not
earn more than twenty. This last sum, indeed, does not exceed

the usual pay of a curate or a stipendiary parish priest, as we find
it regulated by the decrees of several different national councils.

what frequently earned by common labourers in many country
parishes. Whenever the law has attempted to regulate the wages of

At the same period, fourpence a-day, containing the same quan-

workmen, it has always been rather to lower them than to raise

113

The Wealth of Nations
them. But the law has, upon many occasions, attempted to raise
the wages of curates, and, for the dignity of the church, to oblige

efices will draw a sufficient number of learned, decent, and respectable men into holy orders.

the rectors of parishes to give them more than the wretched maintenance which they themselves might be willing to accept of. And,

In professions in which there are no benefices, such as law and
physic, if an equal proportion of people were educated at the pub-

in both cases, the law seems to have been equally ineffectual, and
has never either been able to raise the wages of curates, or to sink

lic expense, the competition would soon be so great as to sink very
much their pecuniary reward. It might then not be worth any

those of labourers to the degree that was intended; because it has
never been able to hinder either the one from being willing to

man’s while to educate his son to either of those professions at his
own expense. They would be entirely abandoned to such as had

accept of less than the legal allowance, on account of the indigence of their situation and the multitude of their competitors, or

been educated by those public charities, whose numbers and necessities would oblige them in general to content themselves with

the other from receiving more, on account of the contrary competition of those who expected to derive either profit or pleasure

a very miserable recompence, to the entire degradation of the now
respectable professions of law and physic.

from employing them.
The great benefices and other ecclesiastical dignities support the

That unprosperous race of men, commonly called men of letters, are pretty much in the situation which lawyers and physi-

honour of the church, notwithstanding the mean circumstances
of some of its inferior members. The respect paid to the profes-

cians probably would be in, upon the foregoing supposition. In
every part of Europe, the greater part of them have been educated

sion, too, makes some compensation even to them for the meanness of their pecuniary recompence. In England, and in all Ro-

for the church, but have been hindered by different reasons from
entering into holy orders. They have generally, therefore, been edu-

man catholic countries, the lottery of the church is in reality much
more advantageous than is necessary. The example of the churches

cated at the public expense; and their numbers are everywhere so
great, as commonly to reduce the price of their labour to a very

of Scotland, of Geneva, and of several other protestant churches,
may satisfy us, that in so creditable a profession, in which educa-

paltry recompence.
Before the invention of the art of printing, the only employ-

tion is so easily procured, the hopes of much more moderate ben-

ment by which a man of letters could make any thing by his tal-

114

Adam Smith
ents, was that of a public or private teacher, or by communicating
to other people the curious and useful knowledge which he had

fessions, the rewards of eminent teachers appear to have been much
more considerable. Isocrates, in what is called his discourse against

acquired himself; and this is still surely a more honourable, a more
useful, and, in general, even a more profitable employment than

the sophists, reproaches the teachers of his own times with inconsistency. “They make the most magnificent promises to their schol-

that other of writing for a bookseller, to which the art of printing
has given occasion. The time and study, the genius, knowledge,

ars,” says he, “and undertake to teach them to be wise, to be happy,
and to be just; and, in return for so important a service, they stipu-

and application requisite to qualify an eminent teacher of the sciences, are at least equal to what is necessary for the greatest practi-

late the paltry reward of four or five minae.” “They who teach
wisdom,” continues he, “ought certainly to be wise themselves;

tioners in law and physic. But the usual reward of the eminent
teacher bears no proportion to that of the lawyer or physician,

but if any man were to sell such a bargain for such a price, he
would be convicted of the most evident folly.” He certainly does

because the trade of the one is crowded with indigent people, who
have been brought up to it at the public expense; whereas those of

not mean here to exaggerate the reward, and we may be assured
that it was not less than he represents it. Four minae were equal to

the other two are encumbered with very few who have not been
educated at their own. The usual recompence, however, of public

thirteen pounds six shillings and eightpence; five minae to sixteen
pounds thirteen shillings and fourpence. Something not less than

and private teachers, small as it may appear, would undoubtedly
be less than it is, if the competition of those yet more indigent

the largest of those two sums, therefore, must at that time have
been usually paid to the most eminent teachers at Athens. Isocrates

men of letters, who write for bread, was not taken out of the market. Before the invention of the art of printing, a scholar and a

himself demanded ten minae, or £ 33:6:8 from each scholar. When
he taught at Athens, he is said to have had a hundred scholars. I

beggar seem to have been terms very nearly synonymous. The different governors of the universities, before that time, appear to

understand this to be the number whom he taught at one time, or
who attended what we would call one course of lectures; a num-

have often granted licences to their scholars to beg.
In ancient times, before any charities of this kind had been es-

ber which will not appear extraordinary from so great a city to so
famous a teacher, who taught, too, what was at that time the most

tablished for the education of indigent people to the learned pro-

fashionable of all sciences, rhetoric. He must have made, there-

115

The Wealth of Nations
fore, by each course of lectures, a thousand minae, or £ 3335:6:8.
A thousand minae, accordingly, is said by Plutarch, in another

considerable republic.
Carneades, too, was a Babylonian by birth; and as there never

place, to have been his didactron, or usual price of teaching. Many
other eminent teachers in those times appear to have acquired

was a people more jealous of admitting foreigners to public offices
than the Athenians, their consideration for him must have been

great fortunes. Georgias made a present to the temple of Delphi
of his own statue in solid gold. We must not, I presume, suppose

very great.
This inequality is, upon the whole, perhaps rather advantageous

that it was as large as the life. His way of living, as well as that of
Hippias and Protagoras, two other eminent teachers of those times,

than hurtful to the public. It may somewhat degrade the profession of a public teacher; but the cheapness of literary education is

is represented by Plato as splendid, even to ostentation. Plato himself is said to have lived with a good deal of magnificence. Aristotle,

surely an advantage which greatly overbalances this trifling inconveniency. The public, too, might derive still greater benefit from

after having been tutor to Alexander, and most munificently rewarded, as it is universally agreed, both by him and his father,

it, if the constitution of those schools and colleges, in which education is carried on, was more reasonable than it is at present

Philip, thought it worth while, notwithstanding, to return to Athens, in order to resume the teaching of his school. Teachers of the

through the greater part of Europe.
Thirdly, the policy of Europe, by obstructing the free circula-

sciences were probably in those times less common than they came
to be in an age or two afterwards, when the competition had prob-

tion of labour and stock, both from employment to employment,
and from place to place, occasions, in some cases, a very inconve-

ably somewhat reduced both the price of their labour and the
admiration for their persons. The most eminent of them, how-

nient inequality in the whole of the advantages and disadvantages
of their different employments.

ever, appear always to have enjoyed a degree of consideration much
superior to any of the like profession in the present times. The

The statute of apprenticeship obstructs the free circulation of
labour from one employment to another, even in the same place.

Athenians sent Carneades the academic, and Diogenes the stoic,
upon a solemn embassy to Rome; and though their city had then

The exclusive privileges of corporations obstruct it from one place
to another, even in the same employment.

declined from its former grandeur, it was still an independent and

It frequently happens, that while high wages are given to the

116

Adam Smith
workmen in one manufacture, those in another are obliged to
content themselves with bare subsistence. The one is in an ad-

work men of other decaying manufactures, who, wherever the statute of apprenticeship takes place, have no other choice, but dither

vancing state, and has therefore a continual demand for new hands;
the other is in a declining state, and the superabundance of hands

to come upon the parish, or to work as common labourers; for
which, by their habits, they are much worse qualified than for any

is continually increasing. Those two manufactures may sometimes
be in the same town, and sometimes in the same neighbourhood,

sort of manufacture that bears any resemblance to their own. They
generally, therefore, chuse to come upon the parish.

without being able to lend the least assistance to one another. The
statute of apprenticeship may oppose it in the one case, and both

Whatever obstructs the free circulation of labour from one employment to another, obstructs that of stock likewise; the quantity

that and an exclusive corporation in the other. In many different
manufactures, however, the operations are so much alike, that the

of stock which can be employed in any branch of business depending very much upon that of the labour which can be em-

workmen could easily change trades with one another, if those
absurd laws did not hinder them. The arts of weaving plain linen

ployed in it. Corporation laws, however, give less obstruction to
the free circulation of stock from one place to another, than to

and plain silk, for example, are almost entirely the same. That of
weaving plain woollen is somewhat different; but the difference is

that of labour. It is everywhere much easier for a wealthy merchant to obtain the privilege of trading in a town-corporate, than

so insignificant, that either a linen or a silk weaver might become
a tolerable workman in a very few days. If any of those three capi-

for a poor artificer to obtain that of working in it.
The obstruction which corporation laws give to the free circula-

tal manufactures, therefore, were decaying, the workmen might
find a resource in one of the other two which was in a more pros-

tion of labour is common, I believe, to every part of Europe. That
which is given to it by the poor laws is, so far as I know, peculiar to

perous condition; and their wages would neither rise too high in
the thriving, nor sink too low in the decaying manufacture. The

England. It consists in the difficulty which a poor man finds in
obtaining a settlement, or even in being allowed to exercise his in-

linen manufacture, indeed, is in England, by a particular statute,
open to every body; but as it is not much cultivated through the

dustry in any parish but that to which he belongs. It is the labour of
artificers and manufacturers only of which the free circulation is

greater part of the country, it can afford no general resource to the

obstructed by corporation laws. The difficulty of obtaining settle-

117

The Wealth of Nations
ments obstructs even that of common labour. It may be worth while
to give some account of the rise, progress, and present state of this

Some frauds, it is said, were committed in consequence of this
statute; parish officers sometime’s bribing their own poor to go

disorder, the greatest, perhaps, of any in the police of England.
When, by the destruction of monasteries, the poor had been

clandestinely to another parish, and, by keeping themselves concealed for forty days, to gain a settlement there, to the discharge of

deprived of the charity of those religious houses, after some other
ineffectual attempts for their relief, it was enacted, by the 43d of

that to which they properly belonged. It was enacted, therefore,
by the 1st of James II. that the forty days undisturbed residence of

Elizabeth, c. 2. that every parish should be bound to provide for
its own poor, and that overseers of the poor should be annually

any person necessary to gain a settlement, should be accounted
only from the time of his delivering notice, in writing, of the place

appointed, who, with the church-wardens, should raise, by a parish rate, competent sums for this purpose.

of his abode and the number of his family, to one of the churchwardens or overseers of the parish where he came to dwell.

By this statute, the necessity of providing for their own poor
was indispensably imposed upon every parish. Who were to be

But parish officers, it seems, were not always more honest with
regard to their own than they had been with regard to other par-

considered as the poor of each parish became, therefore, a question of some importance. This question, after some variation, was

ishes, and sometimes connived at such intrusions, receiving the
notice, and taking no proper steps in consequence of it. As every

at last determined by the 13th and 14th of Charles II. when it was
enacted, that forty days undisturbed residence should gain any

person in a parish, therefore, was supposed to have an interest to
prevent as much as possible their being burdened by such intrud-

person a settlement in any parish; but that within that time it
should be lawful for two justices of the peace, upon complaint

ers, it was further enacted by the 3rd of William III. that the forty
days residence should be accounted only from the publication of

made by the church-wardens or overseers of the poor, to remove
any new inhabitant to the parish where he was last legally settled;

such notice in writing on Sunday in the church, immediately after
divine service.

unless he either rented a tenement of ten pounds a-year, or could
give such security for the discharge of the parish where he was

“After all,” says Doctor Burn, “this kind of settlement, by continuing forty days after publication of notice in writing, is very

then living, as those justices should judge sufficient.

seldom obtained; and the design of the acts is not so much for

118

Adam Smith
gaining of settlements, as for the avoiding of them by persons
coming into a parish clandestinely, for the giving of notice is only

No married man can well gain any settlement in either of the
two last ways. An apprentice is scarce ever married; and it is

putting a force upon the parish to remove. But if a person’s situation is such, that it is doubtful whether he is actually removable or

expressly enacted, that no married servant shall gain any settlement by being hired for a year. The principal effect of introduc-

not, he shall, by giving of notice, compel the parish either to allow
him a settlement uncontested, by suffering him to continue forty

ing settlement by service, has been to put out in a great measure
the old fashion of hiring for a year; which before had been so

days, or by removing him to try the right.”
This statute, therefore, rendered it almost impracticable for a

customary in England, that even at this day, if no particular term
is agreed upon, the law intends that every servant is hired for a

poor man to gain a new settlement in the old way, by forty days
inhabitancy. But that it might not appear to preclude altogether

year. But masters are not always willing to give their servants a
settlement by hiring them in this manner; and servants are not

the common people of one’ parish from ever establishing themselves with security in another, it appointed four other ways by

always willing to be so hired, because, as every last settlement
discharges all the foregoing, they might thereby lose their origi-

which a settlement might be gained without any notice delivered
or published. The first was, by being taxed to parish rates and

nal settlement in the places of their nativity, the habitation of
their parents and relations.

paying them; the second, by being elected into an annual parish
office, and serving in it a year; the third, by serving an apprentice-

No independent workman, it is evident, whether labourer or
artificer, is likely to gain any new settlement, either by apprentice-

ship in the parish; the fourth, by being hired into service there for
a year, and continuing in the same service during the whole of it.

ship or by service. When such a person, therefore, carried his industry to a new parish, he was liable to be removed, how healthy

Nobody can gain a settlement by either of the two first ways, but
by the public deed of the whole parish, who are too well aware of

and industrious soever, at the caprice of any churchwarden or overseer, unless he either rented a tenement of ten pounds a-year, a

the consequences to adopt any new-comer, who has nothing but
his labour to support him, either by taxing him to parish rates, or

thing impossible for one who has nothing but his labour to live
by, or could give such security for the discharge of the parish as

by electing him into a parish office.

two justices of the peace should judge sufficient.

119

The Wealth of Nations
What security they shall require, indeed, is left altogether to
their discretion; but they cannot well require less than thirty

serving upon his own account in an annual parish office for one
whole year; and consequently neither by notice nor by service, nor

pounds, it having been enacted, that the purchase even of a freehold estate of less than thirty pounds value, shall not gain any

by apprenticeship, nor by paying parish rates. By the 12th of Queen
Anne, too, stat. 1, c.18, it was further enacted, that neither the

person a settlement, as not being sufficient for the discharge of the
parish. But this is a security which scarce any man who lives by

servants nor apprentices of such certificated man should gain any
settlement in the parish where he resided under such certificate.

labour can give; and much greater security is frequently demanded.
In order to restore, in some measure, that free circulation of

How far this invention has restored that free circulation of labour,
which the preceding statutes had almost entirely taken away, we

labour which those different statutes had almost entirely taken
away, the invention of certificates was fallen upon. By the 8th and

may learn from the following very judicious observation of Doctor Burn. “It is obvious,” says he, “that there are divers good rea-

9th of William III. it was enacted that if any person should bring
a certificate from the parish where he was last legally settled, sub-

sons for requiring certificates with persons coming to settle in any
place; namely, that persons residing under them can gain no settle-

scribed by the church-wardens and overseers of the poor, and allowed by two justices of the peace, that every other parish should

ment, neither by apprenticeship, nor by service, nor by giving
notice, nor by paying parish rates; that they can settle neither ap-

be obliged to receive him; that he should not be removable merely
upon account of his being likely to become chargeable, but only

prentices nor servants; that if they become chargeable, it is certainly known whither to remove them, and the parish shall be

upon his becoming actually chargeable; and that then the parish
which granted the certificate should be obliged to pay the expense

paid for the removal, and for their maintenance in the mean time;
and that, if they fall sick, and cannot be removed, the parish which

both of his maintenance and of his removal. And in order to give
the most perfect security to the parish where such certificated man

gave the certificate must maintain them; none of all which can be
without a certificate. Which reasons will hold proportionably for

should come to reside, it was further enacted by the same statute,
that he should gain no settlement there by any means whatever,

parishes not granting certificates in ordinary cases; for it is far
more than an equal chance, but that they will have the certificated

except either by renting a tenement of ten pounds a-year, or by

persons again, and in a worse condition.” The moral of this obser-

120

Adam Smith
vation seems to be, that certificates ought always to be required by
the parish where any poor man comes to reside, and that they

but a man with a wife and family who should attempt to do so,
would, in most parishes, be sure of being removed; and, if the

ought very seldom to be granted by that which he purposes to
leave. “There is somewhat of hardship in this matter of certifi-

single man should afterwards marry, he would generally be removed likewise. The scarcity of hands in one parish, therefore,

cates,” says the same very intelligent author, in his History of the
Poor Laws, “by putting it in the power of a parish officer to im-

cannot always be relieved by their superabundance in another, as
it is constantly in Scotland, and. I believe, in all other countries

prison a man as it were for life, however inconvenient it may be
for him to continue at that place where he has had the misfortune

where there is no difficulty of settlement. In such countries, though
wages may sometimes rise a little in the neighbourhood of a great

to acquire what is called a settlement, or whatever advantage he
may propose himself by living elsewhere.”

town, or wherever else there is an extraordinary demand for labour,
and sink gradually as the distance from such places increases, till

Though a certificate carries along with it no testimonial of good
behaviour, and certifies nothing but that the person belongs to

they fall back to the common rate of the country; yet we never
meet with those sudden and unaccountable differences in the wages

the parish to which he really does belong, it is altogether discretionary in the parish officers either to grant or to refuse it. A man-

of neighbouring places which we sometimes find in England, where
it is often more difficult for a poor man to pass the artificial bound-

damus was once moved for, says Doctor Burn, to compel the
church-wardens and overseers to sign a certificate; but the Court

ary of a parish, than an arm of the sea, or a ridge of high mountains, natural boundaries which sometimes separate very distinctly

of King’s Bench rejected the motion as a very strange attempt.
The very unequal price of labour which we frequently find in

different rates of wages in other countries.
To remove a man who has committed no misdemeanour, from

England, in places at no great distance from one another, is probably owing to the obstruction which the law of settlements gives

the parish where he chooses to reside, is an evident violation of
natural liberty and justice. The common people of England, how-

to a poor man who would carry his industry from one parish to
another without a certificate. A single man, indeed who is healthy

ever, so jealous of their liberty, but like the common people of
most other countries, never rightly understanding wherein it con-

and industrious, may sometimes reside by sufferance without one;

sists, have now, for more than a century together, suffered them-

121

The Wealth of Nations
selves to be exposed to this oppression without a remedy. Though
men of reflection, too, have some. times complained of the law of

and their workmen from accepting, more than two shillings and
sevenpence halfpenny a-day, except in the case of a general mourn-

settlements as a public grievance; yet it has never been the object
of any general popular clamour, such as that against general war-

ing. Whenever the legislature attempts to regulate the differences
between masters and their workmen, its counsellors are always the

rants, an abusive practice undoubtedly, but such a one as was not
likely to occasion any general oppression. There is scarce a poor

masters. When the regulation, therefore, is in favour of the workmen, it is always just and equitable; but it is sometimes otherwise

man in England, of forty years of age, I will venture to say, who
has not, in some part of his life, felt himself most cruelly oppressed

when in favour of the masters. Thus the law which obliges the
masters in several different trades to pay their workmen in money,

by this ill-contrived law of settlements.
I shall conclude this long chapter with observing, that though

and not in goods, is quite just and equitable. It imposes no real
hardship upon the masters. It only obliges them to pay that value

anciently it was usual to rate wages, first by general laws extending
over the whole kingdom, and afterwards by particular orders of the

in money, which they pretended to pay, but did not always really
pay, in goods. This law is in favour of the workmen; but the 8th of

justices of peace in every particular county, both these practices have
now gone entirely into disuse. “By the experience of above four

George III. is in favour of the masters. When masters combine
together, in order to reduce the wages of their workmen, they

hundred years,” says Doctor Burn, “it seems time to lay aside all
endeavours to bring under strict regulations, what in its own nature

commonly enter into a private bond or agreement, not to give
more than a certain wage, under a certain penalty. Were the work-

seems incapable of minute limitation; for if all persons in the same
kind of work were to receive equal wages, there would be no emula-

men to enter into a contrary combination of the same kind, not to
accept of a certain wage, under a certain penalty, the law would

tion, and no room left for industry or ingenuity.”
Particular acts of parliament, however, still attempt sometimes

punish them very severely; and, if it dealt impartially, it would
treat the masters in the same manner. But the 8th of George III.

to regulate wages in particular trades, and in particular places.
Thus the 8th of George III. prohibits, under heavy penalties, all

enforces by law that very regulation which masters sometimes attempt to establish by such combinations. The complaint of the

master tailors in London, and five miles round it, from giving,

workmen, that it puts the ablest and most industrious upon the

122

Adam Smith
same footing with an ordinary workman, seems perfectly well
founded.

public welfare, though they affect the general rates both of wages
and profit, must, in the end, affect them equally in all different

In ancient times, too, it was usual to attempt to regulate the
profits of merchants and other dealers, by regulating the price of

employments. The proportion between them, therefore, must remain the same, and cannot well be altered, at least for any consid-

provisions and ether goods. The assize of bread is, so far as I know,
the only remnant of this ancient usage. Where there is an exclu-

erable time, by any such revolutions.

sive corporation, it may, perhaps, be proper to regulate the price
of the first necessary of life; but, where there is none, the competition will regulate it much better than any assize. The method of
fixing the assize of bread, established by the 31st of George II.
could not be put in practice in Scotland, on account of a defect in
the law, its execution depending upon the office of clerk of the
market, which does not exist there. This defect was not remedied
till the third of George III. The want of an assize occasioned no
sensible inconveniency; and the establishment of one in the few
places where it has yet taken place has produced no sensible advantage. In the greater part of the towns in Scotland, however,
there is an incorporation of bakers, who claim exclusive privileges,
though they are not very strictly guarded. The proportion between
the different rates, both of wages and profit, in the different employments of labour and stock, seems not to be much affected, as
has already been observed, by the riches or poverty, the advancing,
stationary, or declining state of the society. Such revolutions in the

123

The Wealth of Nations

CHAPTER XI

what less, than the ordinary profits of farming stock in the
neighbourhood. This portion, however, may still be considered as

OF THE RENT OF LAND

the natural rent of land, or the rent at which it is naturally meant
that land should, for the most part, be let.

RENT, CONSIDERED as the price paid for the use of land, is naturally
the highest which the tenant can afford to pay in the actual cir-

The rent of land, it may be thought, is frequently no more than a
reasonable profit or interest for the stock laid out by the landlord

cumstances of the land. In adjusting the terms of the lease, the
landlord endeavours to leave him no greater share of the produce

upon its improvement. This, no doubt, may be partly the case upon
some occasions; for it can scarce ever be more than partly the case.

than what is sufficient to keep up the stock from which he furnishes the seed, pays the labour, and purchases and maintains the

The landlord demands a rent even for unimproved land, and the
supposed interest or profit upon the expense of improvement is

cattle and other instruments of husbandry, together with the ordinary profits of farming stock in the neighbourhood. This is evi-

generally an addition to this original rent. Those improvements,
besides, are not always made by the stock of the landlord, but some-

dently the smallest share with which the tenant can content himself, without being a loser, and the landlord seldom means to leave

times by that of the tenant. When the lease comes to be renewed,
however, the landlord commonly demands the same augmentation

him any more. Whatever part of the produce, or, what is the same
thing, whatever part of its price, is over and above this share, he

of rent as if they had been all made by his own.
He sometimes demands rent for what is altogether incapable of

naturally endeavours to reserve to himself as the rent of his land,
which is evidently the highest the tenant can afford to pay in the

human improvements. Kelp is a species of sea-weed, which, when
burnt, yields an alkaline salt, useful for making glass, soap, and for

actual circumstances of the land. Sometimes, indeed, the liberality, more frequently the ignorance, of the landlord, makes him

several other purposes. It grows in several parts of Great Britain,
particularly in Scotland, upon such rocks only as lie within the

accept of somewhat less than this portion; and sometimes, too,
though more rarely, the ignorance of the tenant makes him un-

high-water mark, which are twice every day covered with the sea,
and of which the produce, therefore, was never augmented by

dertake to pay somewhat more, or to content himself with some-

human industry. The landlord, however, whose estate is bounded

124

Adam Smith
by a kelp shore of this kind, demands a rent for it as much as for
his corn-fields.

more, depends upon the demand.
There are some parts of the produce of land, for which the de-

The sea in the neighbourhood of the islands of Shetland is more
than commonly abundant in fish, which makes a great part of the

mand must always be such as to afford a greater price than what is
sufficient to bring them to market; and there are others for which

subsistence of their inhabitants. But, in order to profit by the produce of the water, they must have a habitation upon the

it either may or may not be such as to afford this greater price.
The former must always afford a rent to the landlord. The latter

neighbouring land. The rent of the landlord is in proportion, not
to what the farmer can make by the land, but to what he can make

sometimes may and sometimes may not, according to different
circumstances.

both by the land and the water. It is partly paid in sea-fish; and
one of the very few instances in which rent makes a part of the

Rent, it is to be observed, therefore, enters into the composition
of the price of commodities in a different way from wages and

price of that commodity, is to be found in that country.
The rent of land, therefore, considered as the price paid for the

profit. High or low wages and profit are the causes of high or low
price; high or low rent is the effect of it. It is because high or low

use of the land, is naturally a monopoly price. It is not at all proportioned to what the landlord may have laid out upon the im-

wages and profit must be paid, in order to bring a particular commodity to market, that its price is high or low. But it is because its

provement of the land, or to what he can afford to take, but to
what the farmer can afford to give.

price is high or low, a great deal more, or very little more, or no
more, than what is sufficient to pay those wages and profit, that it

Such parts only of the produce of land can commonly be brought
to market, of which the ordinary price is sufficient to replace the

affords a high rent, or a low rent, or no rent at all.
The particular consideration, first, of those parts of the produce

stock which must be employed in bringing them thither, together
with its ordinary profits. If the ordinary price is more than this,

of land which always afford some rent; secondly, of those which
sometimes may and sometimes may not afford rent; and, thirdly,

the surplus part of it will naturally go to the rent of the land. If it
is not more, though the commodity may be brought to market, it

of the variations which, in the different periods of improvement,
naturally take place in the relative value of those two different

can afford no rent to the landlord. Whether the price is, or is not

sorts of rude produce, when compared both with one another and

125

The Wealth of Nations
with manufactured commodities, will divide this chapter into three
parts.
PART I. — Of the Produce of Land which always affords Rent.
As men, like all other animals, naturally multiply in proportion
to the means of their subsistence, food is always more or less in

sort of pasture for cattle, of which the milk and the increase are
always more than sufficient, not only to maintain all the labour
necessary for tending them, and to pay the ordinary profit to the
farmer or the owner of the herd or flock, but to afford some small
rent to the landlord. The rent increases in proportion to the goodness of the pasture. The same extent of ground not only maintains

demand. It can always purchase or command a greater or smaller
quantity of labour, and somebody can always be found who is

a greater number of cattle, but as they we brought within a smaller
compass, less labour becomes requisite to tend them, and to col-

willing to do something in order to obtain it. The quantity of
labour, indeed, which it can purchase, is not always equal to what

lect their produce. The landlord gains both ways; by the increase
of the produce, and by the diminution of the labour which must

it could maintain, if managed in the most economical manner, on
account of the high wages which are sometimes given to labour;

be maintained out of it.
The rent of land not only varies with its fertility, whatever be its

but it can always purchase such a quantity of labour as it can
maintain, according to the rate at which that sort of labour is

produce, but with its situation, whatever be its fertility. Land in
the neighbourhood of a town gives a greater rent than land equally

commonly maintained in the neighbourhood.
But land, in almost any situation, produces a greater quantity of

fertile in a distant part of the country. Though it may cost no
more labour to cultivate the one than the other, it must always

food than what is sufficient to maintain all the labour necessary
for bringing it to market, in the most liberal way in which that

cost more to bring the produce of the distant land to market. A
greater quantity of labour, therefore, must be maintained out of

labour is ever maintained. The surplus, too, is always more than
sufficient to replace the stock which employed that labour, to-

it; and the surplus, from which are drawn both the profit of the
farmer and the rent of the landlord, must be diminished. But in

gether with its profits. Something, therefore, always remains for a
rent to the landlord.

remote parts of the country, the rate of profit, as has already been
shewn, is generally higher than in the neighbourhood of a large

The most desert moors in Norway and Scotland produce some

town. A smaller proportion of this diminished surplus, therefore,

126

Adam Smith
must belong to the landlord.
Good roads, canals, and navigable rivers, by diminishing the

A corn field of moderate fertility produces a much greater quantity of food for man, than the best pasture of equal extent. Though

expense of carriage, put the remote parts of the country more nearly
upon a level with those in the neighbourhood of the town. They

its cultivation requires much more labour, yet the surplus which
remains after replacing the seed and maintaining all that labour, is

are upon that account the greatest of all improvements. They encourage the cultivation of the remote, which must always be the

likewise much greater. If a pound of butcher’s meat, therefore, was
never supposed to be worth more than a pound of bread, this

most extensive circle of the country. They are advantageous to the
town by breaking down the monopoly of the country in its

greater surplus would everywhere be of greater value and constitute a greater fund, both for the profit of the farmer and the rent

neighbourhood. They are advantageous even to that part of the
country. Though they introduce some rival commodities into the

of the landlord. It seems to have done so universally in the rude
beginnings of agriculture.

old market, they open many new markets to its produce. Monopoly, besides, is a great enemy to good management, which can

But the relative values of those two different species of food,
bread and butcher’s meat, are very different in the different peri-

never be universally established, but in consequence of that free
and universal competition which forces every body to have re-

ods of agriculture. In its rude beginnings, the unimproved wilds,
which then occupy the far greater part of the country, are all aban-

course to it for the sake of self defence. It is not more than fifty
years ago, that some of the counties in the neighbourhood of Lon-

doned to cattle. There is more butcher’s meat than bread; and
bread, therefore, is the food for which there is the greatest compe-

don petitioned the parliament against the extension of the turnpike roads into the remoter counties. Those remoter counties, they

tition, and which consequently brings the greatest price. At Buenos
Ayres, we are told by Ulloa, four reals, one-and-twenty pence

pretended, from the cheapness of labour, would be able to sell
their grass and corn cheaper in the London market than them-

halfpenny sterling, was, forty or fifty years ago, the ordinary price
of an ox, chosen from a herd of two or three hundred. He says

selves, and would thereby reduce their rents, and ruin their cultivation. Their rents, however, have risen, and their cultivation has

nothing of the price of bread, probably because he found nothing
remarkable about it. An ox there, he says, costs little more than

been improved since that time.

the labour of catching him. But corn can nowhere be raised with-

127

The Wealth of Nations
out a great deal of labour; and in a country which lies upon the
river Plate, at that time the direct road from Europe to the silver

times greater than at the beginning of the century, and the rents of
many Highland estates have been tripled and quadrupled in the

mines of Potosi, the money-price of labour could be very cheap. It
is otherwise when cultivation is extended over the greater part of

same time. In almost every part of Great Britain, a pound of the
best butcher’s meat is, in the present times, generally worth more

the country. There is then more bread than butcher’s meat. The
competition changes its direction, and the price of butcher’s meat

than two pounds of the best white bread; and in plentiful years it
is sometimes worth three or four pounds.

becomes greater than the price of bread.
By the extension, besides, of cultivation, the unimproved wilds

It is thus that, in the progress of improvement, the rent and
profit of unimproved pasture come to be regulated in some mea-

become insufficient to supply the demand for butcher’s meat. A
great part of the cultivated lands must be employed in rearing and

sure by the rent and profit of what is improved, and these again by
the rent and profit of corn. Corn is an annual crop; butcher’s meat,

fattening cattle; of which the price, therefore, must be sufficient
to pay, not only the labour necessary for tending them, but the

a crop which requires four or five years to grow. As an acre of land,
therefore, will produce a much smaller quantity of the one species

rent which the landlord, and the profit which the farmer, could
have drawn from such land employed in tillage. The cattle bred

of food than of the other, the inferiority of the quantity must be
compensated by the superiority of the price. If it was more than

upon the most uncultivated moors, when brought to the same
market, are, in proportion to their weight or goodness, sold at the

compensated, more corn-land would be turned into pasture; and
if it was not compensated, part of what was in pasture would be

same price as those which are reared upon the most improved
land. The proprietors of those moors profit by it, and raise the

brought back into corn.
This equality, however, between the rent and profit of grass and

rent of their land in proportion to the price of their cattle. It is not
more than a century ago, that in many parts of the Highlands of

those of corn; of the land of which the immediate produce is food
for cattle, and of that of which the immediate produce is food for

Scotland, butcher’s meat was as cheap or cheaper than even bread
made of oatmeal The Union opened the market of England to the

men, must be understood to take place only through the greater
part of the improved lands of a great country. In some particular

Highland cattle. Their ordinary price, at present, is about three

local situations it is quite otherwise, and the rent and profit of

128

Adam Smith
grass are much superior to what can be made by corn.
Thus, in the neighbourhood of a great town, the demand for

must have been very much discouraged by the distributions of
corn which were frequently made to the people, either gratuitously,

milk, and for forage to horses, frequently contribute, together with
the high price of butcher’s meat, to raise the value of grass above

or at a very low price. This corn was brought from the conquered
provinces, of which several, instead of taxes, were obliged to fur-

what may be called its natural proportion to that of corn. This
local advantage, it is evident, cannot be communicated to the lands

nish a tenth part of their produce at a stated price, about sixpence
a-peck, to the republic. The low price at which this corn was dis-

at a distance.
Particular circumstances have sometimes rendered some coun-

tributed to the people, must necessarily have sunk the price of
what could be brought to the Roman market from Latium, or the

tries so populous, that the whole territory, like the lands in the
neighbourhood of a great town, has not been sufficient to pro-

ancient territory of Rome, and must have discouraged its cultivation in that country.

duce both the grass and the corn necessary for the subsistence of
their inhabitants. Their lands, therefore, have been principally

In an open country, too, of which the principal produce is corn,
a well-inclosed piece of grass will frequently rent higher than any

employed in the production of grass, the more bulky commodity,
and which cannot be so easily brought from a great distance; and

corn field in its neighbourhood. It is convenient for the maintenance of the cattle employed in the cultivation of the corn; and its

corn, the food of the great body of the people, has been chiefly
imported from foreign countries. Holland is at present in this situ-

high rent is, in this case, not so properly paid from the value of its
own produce, as from that of the corn lands which are cultivated

ation; and a considerable part of ancient Italy seems to have been
so during the prosperity of the Romans. To feed well, old Cato

by means of it. It is likely to fall, if ever the neighbouring lands are
completely inclosed. The present high rent of inclosed land in

said, as we are told by Cicero, was the first and most profitable
thing in the management of a private estate; to feed tolerably well,

Scotland seems owing to the scarcity of inclosure, and will probably last no longer than that scarcity. The advantage of inclosure is

the second; and to feed ill, the third. To plough, he ranked only in
the fourth place of profit and advantage. Tillage, indeed, in that

greater for pasture than for corn. It saves the labour of guarding
the cattle, which feed better, too, when they are not liable to be

part of ancient Italy which lay in the neighbour hood of Rome,

disturbed by their keeper or his dog.

129

The Wealth of Nations
But where there is no local advantage of this kind, the rent and
profit of corn, or whatever else is the common vegetable food of

other proof to the same purpose, given in evidence by a Virginia
merchant, that in March 1763, he had victualled his ships for

the people, must naturally regulate upon the land which is fit for
producing it, the rent and profit of pasture.

twentyfour or twenty-five shillings the hundred weight of beef,
which he considered as the ordinary price; whereas, in that dear

The use of the artificial grasses, of turnips, carrots, cabbages,
and the other expedients which have been fallen upon to make an

year, he had paid twenty-seven shillings for the same weight and
sort. This high price in 1764 is, however, four shillings and eight-

equal quantity of land feed a greater number of cattle than when
in natural grass, should somewhat reduce, it might be expected,

pence cheaper than the ordinary price paid by Prince Henry; and
it is the best beef only, it must be observed, which is fit to be salted

the superiority which, in an improved country, the price of butcher’s
meat naturally has over that of bread. It seems accordingly to have

for those distant voyages.
The price paid by Prince Henry amounts to 3d. 4/5ths per pound

done so; and there is some reason for believing that, at least in the
London market, the price of butcher’s meat, in proportion to the

weight of the whole carcase, coarse and choice pieces taken together; and at that rate the choice pieces could not have been sold

price of bread, is a good deal lower in the present times than it was
in the beginning of the last century.

by retail for less than 4½d. or 5d. the pound.
In the parliamentary inquiry in 1764, the witnesses stated the

In the Appendix to the life of Prince Henry, Doctor Birch has
given us an account of the prices of butcher’s meat as commonly

price of the choice pieces of the best beef to be to the consumer
4d. and 4½d. the pound; and the coarse pieces in general to be

paid by that prince. It is there said, that the four quarters of an ox,
weighing six hundred pounds, usually cost him nine pounds ten

from seven farthings to 2½d. and 2¾d.; and this, they said, was in
general one halfpenny dearer than the same sort of pieces had

shillings, or thereabouts; that is thirty-one shillings and eight-pence
per hundred pounds weight. Prince Henry died on the 6th of

usually been sold in the month of March. But even this high price
is still a good deal cheaper than what we can well suppose the

November 1612, in the nineteenth year of his age.
In March 1764, there was a parliamentary inquiry into the causes

ordinary retail price to have been in the time of Prince Henry.
During the first twelve years of the last century, the average price

of the high price of provisions at that time. It was then, among

of the best wheat at the Windsor market was £ 1:18:3½d. the

130

Adam Smith
quarter of nine Winchester bushels.
But in the twelve years preceding 1764 including that year, the

of the landlord, and the profit of the farmer, are generally greater
than in acorn or grass field. But to bring the ground into this

average price of the same measure of the best wheat at the same
market was £ 2:1:9½d.

condition requires more expense. Hence a greater rent becomes
due to the landlord. It requires, too, a more attentive and skilful

In the first twelve years of the last century, therefore, wheat appears to have been a good deal cheaper, and butcher’s meat a good

management. Hence a greater profit becomes due to the farmer.
The crop, too, at least in the hop and fruit garden, is more pre-

deal dearer, than in the twelve years preceding 1764, including
that year.

carious. Its price, therefore, besides compensating all occasional
losses, must afford something like the profit of insurance. The

In all great countries, the greater part of the cultivated lands are
employed in producing either food for men or food for cattle. The

circumstances of gardeners, generally mean, and always moderate, may satisfy us that their great ingenuity is not commonly over-

rent and profit of these regulate the rent and profit of all other
cultivated land. If any particular produce afforded less, the land

recompensed. Their delightful art is practised by so many rich
people for amusement, that little advantage is to be made by those

would soon be turned into corn or pasture; and if any afforded
more, some part of the lands in corn or pasture would soon be

who practise it for profit; because the persons who should naturally be their best customers, supply themselves with all their most

turned to that produce.
Those productions, indeed, which require either a greater origi-

precious productions.
The advantage which the landlord derives from such improve-

nal expense of improvement, or a greater annual expense of cultivation in order to fit the land for them, appear commonly to af-

ments, seems at no time to have been greater than what was sufficient to compensate the original expense of making them. In the

ford, the one a greater rent, the other a greater profit, than corn or
pasture. This superiority, however, will seldom be found to amount

ancient husbandry, after the vineyard, a well-watered kitchen garden seems to have been the part of the farm which was supposed

to more than a reasonable interest or compensation for this superior expense.

to yield the most valuable produce. But Democritus, who wrote
upon husbandry about two thousand years ago, and who was re-

In a hop garden, a fruit garden, a kitchen garden, both the rent

garded by the ancients as one of the fathers of the art, thought

131

The Wealth of Nations
they did not act wisely who inclosed a kitchen garden. The profit,
he said, would not compensate the expense of a stone-wall: and

frequently surrounds the kitchen garden, which thus enjoys the benefit of an inclosure which its own produce could seldom pay for.

bricks (he meant, I suppose, bricks baked in the sun) mouldered
with the rain and the winter-storm, and required continual re-

That the vineyard, when properly planted and brought to perfection, was the most valuable part of the farm, seems to have

pairs. Columella, who reports this judgment of Democritus, does
not controvert it, but proposes a very frugal method of inclosing

been an undoubted maxim in the ancient agriculture, as it is in
the modern, through all the wine countries. But whether it was

with a hedge of brambles and briars, which he says he had found
by experience to be both a lasting and an impenetrable fence; but

advantageous to plant a new vineyard, was a matter of dispute
among the ancient Italian husbandmen, as we learn from Col-

which, it seems, was not commonly known in the time of
Democritus. Palladius adopts the opinion of Columella, which

umella. He decides, like a true lover of all curious cultivation, in
favour of the vineyard; and endeavours to shew, by a comparison

had before been recommended by Varro. In the judgment of those
ancient improvers, the produce of a kitchen garden had, it seems,

of the profit and expense, that it was a most advantageous improvement. Such comparisons, however, between the profit and

been little more than sufficient to pay the extraordinary culture
and the expense of watering; for in countries so near the sun, it

expense of new projects are commonly very fallacious; and in nothing more so than in agriculture. Had the gain actually made by

was thought proper, in those times as in the present, to have the
command of a stream of water, which could be conducted to ev-

such plantations been commonly as great as he imagined it might
have been, there could have been no dispute about it. The same

ery bed in the garden. Through the greater part of Europe, a kitchen
garden is not at present supposed to deserve a better inclosure

point is frequently at this day a matter of controversy in the wine
countries. Their writers on agriculture, indeed, the lovers and pro-

than mat recommended by Columella. In Great Britain, and some
other northern countries, the finer fruits cannot Be brought to

moters of high cultivation, seem generally disposed to decide with
Columella in favour of the vineyard. In France, the anxiety of the

perfection but by the assistance of a wall. Their price, therefore, in
such countries, must be sufficient to pay the expense of building

proprietors of the old vineyards to prevent the planting of any
new ones, seems to favour their opinion, and to indicate a con-

and maintaining what they cannot be had without. The fruit-wall

sciousness in those who must have the experience, that this spe-

132

Adam Smith
cies of cultivation is at present in that country more profitable
than any other. It seems, at the same time, however, to indicate

paying it, is surely a most unpromising expedient for encouraging
the cultivation of corn. It is like the policy which would promote

another opinion, that this superior profit can last no longer than
the laws which at present restrain the free cultivation of the vine.

agriculture, by discouraging manufactures.
The rent and profit of those productions, therefore, which re-

In 1731, they obtained an order of council, prohibiting both the
planting of new vineyards, and the renewal of these old ones, of

quire either a greater original expense of improvement in order to
fit the land for them, or a greater annual expense of cultivation,

which the cultivation had been interrupted for two years, without
a particular permission from the king, to be granted only in con-

though often much superior to those of corn and pasture, yet when
they do no more than compensate such extraordinary expense, are

sequence of an information from the intendant of the province,
certifying that he had examined the land, and that it was inca-

in reality regulated by the rent and profit of those common crops.
It sometimes happens, indeed, that the quantity of land which

pable of any other culture. The pretence of this order was the
scarcity of corn and pasture, and the superabundance of wine.

can be fitted for some particular produce, is too small to supply
the effectual demand. The whole produce can be disposed of to

But had this superabundance been real, it would, without any
order of council, have effectually prevented the plantation of new

those who are willing to give somewhat more than what is sufficient to pay the whole rent, wages, and profit, necessary for rais-

vineyards, by reducing the profits of this species of cultivation
below their natural proportion to those of corn and pasture. With

ing and bringing it to market, according to their natural rates, or
according to the rates at which they are paid in the greater part of

regard to the supposed scarcity of corn occasioned by the multiplication of vineyards, corn is nowhere in France more carefully

other cultivated land. The surplus part of the price which remains
after defraying the whole expense of improvement and cultiva-

cultivated than in the wine provinces, where the land is fit for
producing it: as in Burgundy, Guienne, and the Upper Languedoc.

tion, may commonly, in this case, and in this case only, bear no
regular proportion to the like surplus in corn or pasture, but may

The numerous hands employed in the one species of cultivation
necessarily encourage the other, by affording a ready market for its

exceed it in almost any degree; and the greater part of this excess
naturally goes to the rent of the landlord.

produce. To diminish the number of those who are capable of

The usual and natural proportion, for example, between the

133

The Wealth of Nations
rent and profit of wine, and those of corn and pasture, must be
understood to take place only with regard to those vineyards which

wine render the competition of the buyers more or less eager.
Whatever it be, the greater part of it goes to the rent of the land-

produce nothing but good common wine, such as can be raised
almost anywhere, upon any light, gravelly, or sandy soil, and which

lord. For though such vineyards are in general more carefully cultivated than most others, the high price of the wine seems to be,

has nothing to recommend it but its strength and wholesomeness.
It is with such vineyards only, that the common land of the coun-

not so much the effect, as the cause of this careful cultivation. In
so valuable a produce, the loss occasioned by negligence is so great,

try can be brought into competition; for with those of a peculiar
quality it is evident that it cannot.

as to force even the most careless to attention. A small part of this
high price, therefore, is sufficient to pay the wages of the extraor-

The vine is more affected by the difference of soils than any
other fruit-tree. From some it derives a flavour which no culture

dinary labour bestowed upon their cultivation, and the profits of
the extraordinary stock which puts that labour into motion.

or management can equal, it is supposed, upon any other. This
flavour, real or imaginary, is sometimes peculiar to the produce of

The sugar colonies possessed by the European nations in the
West Indies may be compared to those precious vineyards. Their

a few vineyards; sometimes it extends through the greater part of a
small district, and sometimes through a considerable part of a

whole produce falls short of the effectual demand of Europe, and
can be disposed of to those who are willing to give more than

large province. The whole quantity of such wines that is brought
to market falls short of the effectual demand, or the demand of

what is sufficient to pay the whole rent, profit, and wages, necessary for preparing and bringing it to market, according to the rate

those who would be willing to pay the whole rent, profit, and
wages, necessary for preparing and bringing them thither, accord-

at which they are commonly paid by any other produce. In Cochin
China, the finest white sugar generally sells for three piastres the

ing to the ordinary rate, or according to the rate at which they are
paid in common vineyards. The whole quantity, therefore, can be

quintal, about thirteen shillings and sixpence of our money, as we
are told by Mr Poivre {Voyages d’un Philosophe.}, a very careful

disposed of to those who are willing to pay more, which necessarily raises their price above that of common wine. The difference is

observer of the agriculture of that country. What is there called
the quintal, weighs from a hundred and fifty to two hundred Paris

greater or less, according as the fashionableness and scarcity of the

pounds, or a hundred and seventy-five Paris pounds at a medium,

134

Adam Smith
which reduces the price of the hundred weight English to about
eight shillings sterling; not a fourth part of what is commonly

notwithstanding the great distance and the uncertain returns, from
the defective administration of justice in those countries. Nobody

paid for the brown or muscovada sugars imported from our colonies, and not a sixth part of what is paid for the finest white sugar.

will attempt to improve and cultivate in the same manner the
most fertile lands of Scotland, Ireland, or the corn provinces of

The greater part of the cultivated lands in Cochin China are employed in producing corn and rice, the food of the great body of

North America, though, from the more exact administration of
justice in these countries, more regular returns might be expected.

the people. The respective prices of corn, rice, and sugar, are there
probably in the natural proportion, or in that which naturally

In Virginia and Maryland, the cultivation of tobacco is preferred, as most profitable, to that of corn. Tobacco might be culti-

takes place in the different crops of the greater part of cultivated
land, and which recompenses the landlord and farmer, as nearly as

vated with advantage through the greater part of Europe; but, in
almost every part of Europe, it has become a principal subject of

can be computed, according to what is usually the original expense of improvement, and the annual expense of cultivation. But

taxation; and to collect a tax from every different farm in the country where this plant might happen to be cultivated, would be more

in our sugar colonies, the price of sugar bears no such proportion
to that of the produce of a rice or corn field either in Europe or

difficult, it has been supposed, than to levy one upon its importation at the custom-house. The cultivation of tobacco has, upon

America. It is commonly said that a sugar planter expects that the
rum and the molasses should defray the whole expense of his cul-

this account, been most absurdly prohibited through the greater
part of Europe, which necessarily gives a sort of monopoly to the

tivation, and that his sugar should be all clear profit. If this be
true, for I pretend not to affirm it, it is as if a corn farmer expected

countries where it is allowed; and as Virginia and Maryland produce the greatest quantity of it, they share largely, though with

to defray the expense of his cultivation with the chaff and the
straw, and that the grain should be all clear profit. We see fre-

some competitors, in the advantage of this monopoly. The cultivation of tobacco, however, seems not to be so advantageous as

quently societies of merchants in London, and other trading towns,
purchase waste lands in our sugar colonies, which they expect to

that of sugar. I have never even heard of any tobacco plantation
that was improved and cultivated by the capital of merchants who

improve and cultivate with profit, by means of factors and agents,

resided in Great Britain; and our tobacco colonies send us home

135

The Wealth of Nations
no such wealthy planters as we see frequently arrive from our sugar
islands. Though, from the preference given in those colonies to

tage of its culture over that of corn, if it still has any, will not
probably be of long continuance.

the cultivation of tobacco above that of corn, it would appear that
the effectual demand of Europe for tobacco is not completely sup-

It is in this manner that the rent of the cultivated land, of which
the produce is human food, regulates the rent of the greater part

plied, it probably is more nearly so than that for sugar; and though
the present price of tobacco is probably more than sufficient to

of other cultivated land. No particular produce can long afford
less, because the land would immediately be turned to another

pay the whole rent, wages, and profit, necessary for preparing and
bringing it to market, according to the rate at which they are com-

use; and if any particular produce commonly affords more, it is
because the quantity of land which can be fitted for it is too small

monly paid in corn land, it must not be so much more as the
present price of sugar. Our tobacco planters, accordingly, have

to supply the effectual demand.
In Europe, corn is the principal produce of land, which serves

shewn the same fear of the superabundance of tobacco, which the
proprietors of the old vineyards in France have of the superabun-

immediately for human food. Except in particular situations, therefore, the rent of corn land regulates in Europe that of all other cul-

dance of wine. By act of assembly, they have restrained its cultivation to six thousand plants, supposed to yield a thousand weight

tivated land. Britain need envy neither the vineyards of France, nor
the olive plantations of Italy. Except in particular situations, the

of tobacco, for every negro between sixteen and sixty years of age.
Such a negro, over and above this quantity of tobacco, can man-

value of these is regulated by that of corn, in which the fertility of
Britain is not much inferior to that of either of those two countries.

age, they reckon, four acres of Indian corn. To prevent the market
from being overstocked, too, they have sometimes, in plentiful

If, in any country, the common and favourite vegetable food of
the people should be drawn from a plant of which the most com-

years, we are told by Dr Douglas {Douglas’s Summary,vol. ii. p.
379, 373.} (I suspect he has been ill informed), burnt a certain

mon land, with the same, or nearly the same culture, produced a
much greater quantity than the most fertile does of corn; the rent

quantity of tobacco for every negro, in the same manner as the
Dutch are said to do of spices. If such violent methods are neces-

of the landlord, or the surplus quantity of food which would remain to him, after paying the labour, and replacing the stock of

sary to keep up the present price of tobacco, the superior advan-

the farmer, together with its ordinary profits, would necessarily be

136

Adam Smith
much greater. Whatever was the rate at which labour was commonly maintained in that country, this greater surplus could al-

A good rice field is a bog at all seasons, and at one season a bog
covered with water. It is unfit either for corn, or pasture, or vine-

ways maintain a greater quantity of it, and, consequently, enable
the landlord to purchase or command a greater quantity of it. The

yard, or, indeed, for any other vegetable produce that is very useful to men; and the lands which are fit for those purposes are not

real value of his rent, his real power and authority, his command
of the necessaries and conveniencies of life with which the labour

fit for rice. Even in the rice countries, therefore, the rent of rice
lands cannot regulate the rent of the other cuitivated land which

of other people could supply him, would necessarily be much
greater.

can never be turned to that produce.
The food produced by a field of potatoes is not inferior in quan-

A rice field produces a much greater quantity of food than the
most fertile corn field. Two crops in the year, from thirty to sixty

tity to that produced by a field of rice, and much superior to what
is produced by a field of wheat. Twelve thousand weight of pota-

bushels each, are said to be the ordinary produce of an acre. Though
its cultivation, therefore, requires more labour, a much greater sur-

toes from an acre of land is not a greater produce than two thousand weight of wheat. The food or solid nourishment, indeed,

plus remains after maintaining all that labour. In those rice countries, therefore, where rice is the common and favourite vegetable

which can be drawn from each of those two plants, is not altogether in proportion to their weight, on account of the watery

food of the people, and where the cultivators are chiefly maintained
with it, a greater share of this greater surplus should belong to the

nature of potatoes. Allowing, however, half the weight of this root
to go to water, a very large allowance, such an acre of potatoes will

landlord than in corn countries. In Carolina, where the planters, as
in other British colonies, are generally both farmers and landlords,

still produce six thousand weight of solid nourishment, three times
the quantity produced by the acre of wheat. An acre of potatoes is

and where rent, consequently, is confounded with profit, the cultivation of rice is found to be more profitable than that of corn, though

cultivated with less expense than an acre of wheat; the fallow, which
generally precedes the sowing of wheat, more than compensating

their fields produce only one crop in the year, and though, from the
prevalence of the customs of Europe, rice is not there the common

the hoeing and other extraordinary culture which is always given
to potatoes. Should this root ever become in any part of Europe,

and favourite vegetable food of the people.

like rice in some rice countries, the common and favourite veg-

137

The Wealth of Nations
etable food of the people, so as to occupy the same proportion of
the lands in tillage, which wheat and other sorts of grain for hu-

people in Scotland is not so suitable to the human constitution as
that of their neighbours of the same rank in England. But it seems

man food do at present, the same quantity of cultivated land would
maintain a much greater number of people; and the labourers

to be otherwise with potatoes. The chairmen, porters, and coalheavers in London, and those unfortunate women who live by

being generally fed with potatoes, a greater surplus would remain
after replacing all the stock, and maintaining all the labour em-

prostitution, the strongest men and the most beautiful women
perhaps in the British dominions, are said to be, the greater part

ployed in cultivation. A greater share of this surplus, too, would
belong to the landlord. Population would increase, and rents would

of them, from the lowest rank of people in Ireland, who are generally fed with this root. No food can afford a more decisive proof of

rise much beyond what they are at present.
The land which is fit for potatoes, is fit for almost every other

its nourishing quality, or of its being peculiarly suitable to the
health of the human constitution.

useful vegetable. If they occupied the same proportion of cultivated land which corn does at present, they would regulate, in the

It is difficult to preserve potatoes through the year, and impossible to store them like corn, for two or three years together. The

same manner, the rent of the greater part of other cultivated land.
In some parts of Lancashire, it is pretended, I have been told,

fear of not being able to sell them before they rot, discourages
their cultivation, and is, perhaps, the chief obstacle to their ever

that bread of oatmeal is a heartier food for labouring people than
wheaten bread, and I have frequently heard the same doctrine

becoming in any great country, like bread, the principal vegetable
food of all the different ranks of the people.

held in Scotland. I am, however, somewhat doubtful of the truth
of it. The common people in Scotland, who are fed with oatmeal,
are in general neither so strong nor so handsome as the same rank
of people in England, who are fed with wheaten bread. They nei-

PART II. — Of the Produce of Land, which sometimes does,
and sometimes does not, afford Rent.
Human food seems to be the only produce of land, which al-

ther work so well, nor look so well; and as there is not the same
difference between the people of fashion in the two countries,

ways and necessarily affords some rent to the landlord. Other sorts
of produce sometimes may, and sometimes may not, according to

experience would seem to shew, that the food of the common

different circumstances.

138

Adam Smith
After food, clothing and lodging are the two great wants of mankind.

als of more clothing than he can wear. If there was no foreign
commerce, the greater part of them would be thrown away as

Land, in its original rude state, can afford the materials of clothing and lodging to a much greater number of people than it can

things of no value. This was probably the case among the hunting
nations of North America, before their country was discovered by

feed. In its improved state, it can sometimes feed a greater number
of people than it can supply with those materials; at least in the

the Europeans, with whom they now exchange their surplus peltry,
for blankets, fire-arms, and brandy, which gives it some value. In

way in which they require them, and are willing to pay for them.
In the one state, therefore, there is always a superabundance of

the present commercial state of the known world, the most barbarous nations, I believe, among whom land property is established,

these materials, which are frequently, upon that account, of little
or no value. In the other, there is often a scarcity, which necessar-

have some foreign commerce of this kind, and find among their
wealthier neighbours such a demand for all the materials of cloth-

ily augments their value. In the one state, a great part of them is
thrown away as useless and the price of what is used is considered

ing, which their land produces, and which can neither be wrought
up nor consumed at home, as raises their price above what it costs

as equal only to the labour and expense of fitting it for use, and
can, therefore, afford no rent to the landlord. In the other, they

to send them to those wealthier neighbours. It affords, therefore,
some rent to the landlord. When the greater part of the Highland

are all made use of, and there is frequently a demand for more
than can be had. Somebody is always willing to give more for

cattle were consumed on their own hills, the exportation of their
hides made the most considerable article of the commerce of that

every part of them, than what is sufficient to pay the expense of
bringing them to market. Their price, therefore, can always afford

country, and what they were exchanged for afforded some addition to the rent of the Highland estates. The wool of England,

some rent to the landlord.
The skins of the larger animals were the original materials of

which in old times, could neither be consumed nor wrought up at
home, found a market in the then wealthier and more industrious

clothing. Among nations of hunters and shepherds, therefore,
whose food consists chiefly in the flesh of those animals, everyman,

country of Flanders, and its price afforded something to the rent
of the land which produced it. In countries not better cultivated

by providing himself with food, provides himself with the materi-

than England was then, or than the Highlands of Scotland are

139

The Wealth of Nations
now, and which had no foreign commerce, the materials of clothing would evidently be so superabundant, that a great part of them

nations, however, sometimes enables him to get a rent for it. The
paving of the streets of London has enabled the owners of some

would be thrown away as useless, and no part could afford any
rent to the landlord.

barren rocks on the coast of Scotland to draw a rent from what
never afforded any before. The woods of Norway, and of the coasts

The materials of lodging cannot always be transported to so
great a distance as those of clothing, and do not so readily become

of the Baltic, find a market in many parts of Great Britain, which
they could not find at home, and thereby afford some rent to their

an object of foreign commerce. When they are superabundant in
the country which produces them, it frequently happens, even in

proprietors.
Countries are populous, not in proportion to the number of

the present commercial state of the world, that they are of no
value to the landlord. A good stone quarry in the neighbourhood

people whom their produce can clothe and lodge, but in proportion to that of those whom it can feed. When food is provided, it

of London would afford a considerable rent. In many parts of
Scotland and Wales it affords none. Barren timber for building is

is easy to find the necessary clothing and lodging. But though
these are at hand, it may often be difficult to find food. In some

of great value in a populous and well-cultivated country, and the
land which produces it affords a considerable rent. But in many

parts of the British dominions, what is called a house may be built
by one day’s labour of one man. The simplest species of clothing,

parts of North America, the landlord would be much obliged to
any body who would carry away the greater part of his large trees.

the skins of animals, require somewhat more labour to dress and
prepare them for use. They do not, however, require a great deal.

In some parts of the Highlands of Scotland, the bark is the only
part of the wood which, for want of roads and water-carriage, can

Among savage or barbarous nations, a hundredth, or little more
than a hundredth part of the labour of the whole year, will be

be sent to market; the timber is left to rot upon the ground. When
the materials of lodging are so superabundant, the part made use

sufficient to provide them with such clothing and lodging as satisfy the greater part of the people. All the other ninety-nine parts

of is worth only the labour and expense of fitting it for that use. It
affords no rent to the landlord, who generally grants the use of it

are frequently no more than enough to provide them with food.
But when, by the improvement and cultivation of land, the

to whoever takes the trouble of asking it. The demand of wealthier

labour of one family can provide food for two, the labour of half

140

Adam Smith
the society becomes sufficient to provide food for the whole. The
other half, therefore, or at least the greater part of them, can be

gratify those fancies of the rich; and to obtain it more certainly,
they vie with one another in the cheapness and perfection of their

employed in providing other things, or in satisfying the other wants
and fancies of mankind. Clothing and lodging, household furni-

work. The number of workmen increases with the increasing quantity of food, or with the growing improvement and cultivation of

ture, and what is called equipage, are the principal objects of the
greater part of those wants and fancies. The rich man consumes

the lands; and as the nature of their business admits of the utmost
subdivisions of labour, the quantity of materials which they can

no more food than his poor neighbour. In quality it may be very
different, and to select and prepare it may require more labour

work up, increases in a much greater proportion than their numbers. Hence arises a demand for every sort of material which hu-

and art; but in quantity it is very nearly the same. But compare
the spacious palace and great wardrobe of the one, with the hovel

man invention can employ, either usefully or ornamentally, in
building, dress, equipage, or household furniture; for the fossils

and the few rags of the other, and you will be sensible that the
difference between their clothing, lodging, and household furni-

and minerals contained in the bowels of the earth, the precious
metals, and the precious stones.

ture, is almost as great in quantity as it is in quality. The desire of
food is limited in every man by the narrow capacity of the human

Food is, in this manner, not only the original source of rent, but
every other part of the produce of land which afterwards affords

stomach; but the desire of the conveniencies and ornaments of
building, dress, equipage, and household furniture, seems to have

rent, derives that part of its value from the improvement of the
powers of labour in producing food, by means of the improve-

no limit or certain boundary. Those, therefore, who have the command of more food than they themselves can consume, are always

ment and cultivation of land.
Those other parts of the produce of land, however, which after-

willing to exchange the surplus, or, what is the same thing, the
price of it, for gratifications of this other kind. What is over and

wards afford rent, do not afford it always. Even in improved and
cultivated countries, the demand for them is not always such as to

above satisfying the limited desire, is given for the amusement of
those desires which cannot be satisfied, but seem to be altogether

afford a greater price than what is sufficient to pay the labour, and
replace, together with its ordinary profits, the stock which must

endless. The poor, in order to obtain food, exert themselves to

be employed in bringing them to market. Whether it is or is not

141

The Wealth of Nations
such, depends upon different circumstances.
Whether a coal mine, for example, can afford any rent, depends

eral, sufficient to defray the expense of working, could be brought
from the mine by the ordinary, or even less than the ordinary

partly upon its fertility, and partly upon its situation.
A mine of any kind may be said to be either fertile or barren,

quantity of labour: but in an inland country, thinly inhabited,
and without either good roads or water-carriage, this quantity could

according as the quantity of mineral which can be brought from it
by a certain quantity of labour, is greater or less than what can be

not be sold.
Coals are a less agreeable fuel than wood: they are said too to be

brought by an equal quantity from the greater part of other mines
of the same kind.

less wholesome. The expense of coals, therefore, at the place where
they are consumed, must generally be somewhat less than that of

Some coal mines, advantageously situated, cannot be wrought
on account of their barrenness. The produce does not pay the

wood.
The price of wood, again, varies with the state of agriculture,

expense. They can afford neither profit nor rent.
There are some, of which the produce is barely sufficient to pay

nearly in the same manner, and exactly for the same reason, as the
price of cattle. In its rude beginnings, the greater part of every

the labour, and replace, together with its ordinary profits, the stock
employed in working them. They afford some profit to the under-

country is covered with wood, which is then a mere incumbrance,
of no value to the landlord, who would gladly give it to any body

taker of the work, but no rent to the landlord. They can be wrought
advantageously by nobody but the landlord, who, being himself

for the cutting. As agriculture advances, the woods are partly cleared
by the progress of tillage, and partly go to decay in consequence of

the undertaker of the work, gets the ordinary profit of the capital
which he employs in it. Many coal mines in Scotland are wrought

the increased number of cattle. These, though they do not increase in the same proportion as corn, which is altogether the ac-

in this manner, and can be wrought in no other. The landlord will
allow nobody else to work them without paying some rent, and

quisition of human industry, yet multiply under the care and protection of men, who store up in the season of plenty what may

nobody can afford to pay any.
Other coal mines in the same country, sufficiently fertile, can-

maintain them in that of scarcity; who, through the whole year,
furnish them with a greater quantity of food than uncultivated

not be wrought on account of their situation. A quantity of min-

nature provides for them; and who, by destroying and extirpating

142

Adam Smith
their enemies, secure them in the free enjoyment of all that she
provides. Numerous herds of cattle, when allowed to wander

may be assured, that at that place, and in these circumstances, the
price of coals is as high as it can be. It seems to be so in some of the

through the woods, though they do not destroy the old trees, hinder
any young ones from coming up; so that, in the course of a cen-

inland parts of England, particularly in Oxfordshire, where it is
usual, even in the fires of the common people, to mix coals and

tury or two, the whole forest goes to ruin. The scarcity of wood
then raises its price. It affords a good rent; and the landlord some-

wood together, and where the difference in the expense of those
two sorts of fuel cannot, therefore, be very great. Coals, in the coal

times finds that he can scarce employ his best lands more advantageously than in growing barren timber, of which the greatness of

countries, are everywhere much below this highest price. If they
were not, they could not bear the expense of a distant carriage,

the profit often compensates the lateness of the returns. This seems,
in the present times, to be nearly the state of things in several parts

either by land or by water. A small quantity only could be sold;
and the coal masters and the coal proprietors find it more for their

of Great Britain, where the profit of planting is found to be equal
to that of either corn or pasture. The advantage which the land-

interest to sell a great quantity at a price somewhat above the lowest, than a small quantity at the highest. The most fertile coal

lord derives from planting can nowhere exceed, at least for any
considerable time, the rent which these could afford him; and in

mine, too, regulates the price of coals at all the other mines in its
neighbourhood. Both the proprietor and the undertaker of the

an inland country, which is highly cuitivated, it will frequently
not fall much short of this rent. Upon the sea-coast of a well-

work find, the one that he can get a greater rent, the other that he
can get a greater profit, by somewhat underselling all their

improved country, indeed, if coals can conveniently be had for
fuel, it may sometimes be cheaper to bring barren timber for build-

neighbours. Their neighbours are soon obliged to sell at the same
price, though they cannot so well afford it, and though it always

ing from less cultivated foreign countries than to raise it at home.
In the new town of Edinburgh, built within these few years, there

diminishes, and sometimes takes away altogether, both their rent
and their profit. Some works are abandoned altogether; others

is not, perhaps, a single stick of Scotch timber.
Whatever may be the price of wood, if that of coals is such that

can afford no rent, and can be wrought only by the proprietor.
The lowest price at which coals can be sold for any considerable

the expense of a coal fire is nearly equal to that of a wood one we

time, is, like that of all other commodities, the price which is barely

143

The Wealth of Nations
sufficient to replace, together with its ordinary profits, the stock
which must be employed in bringing them to market. At a coal

Their market is not confined to the countries in the neighbourhood
of the mine, but extends to the whole world. The copper of Japan

mine for which the landlord can get no rent, but, which he must
either work himself or let it alone altogether, the price of coals

makes an article of commerce in Europe; the iron of Spain in that
of Chili and Peru. The silver of Peru finds its way, not only to

must generally be nearly about this price.
Rent, even where coals afford one, has generally a smaller share

Europe, but from Europe to China.
The price of coals in Westmoreland or Shropshire can have little

in their price than in that of most other parts of the rude produce
of land. The rent of an estate above ground, commonly amounts

effect on their price at Newcastle; and their price in the Lionnois
can have none at all. The productions of such distant coal mines

to what is supposed to be a third of the gross produce; and it is
generally a rent certain and independent of the occasional varia-

can never be brought into competition with one another. But the
productions of the most distant metallic mines frequently may,

tions in the crop. In coal mines, a fifth of the gross produce is a
very great rent, a tenth the common rent; and it is seldom a rent

and in fact commonly are.
The price, therefore, of the coarse, and still more that of the

certain, but depends upon the occasional variations in the produce. These are so great, that in a country where thirty years pur-

precious metals, at the most fertile mines in the world, must necessarily more or less affect their price at every other in it. The price

chase is considered as a moderate price for the property of a landed
estate, ten years purchase is regarded as a good price for that of a

of copper in Japan must have some influence upon its price at the
copper mines in Europe. The price of silver in Peru, or the quan-

coal mine.
The value of a coal mine to the proprietor, frequently depends

tity either of labour or of other goods which it will purchase there,
must have some influence on its price, not only at the silver mines

as much upon its situation as upon its fertility. That of a metallic
mine depends more upon its fertility, and less upon its situation.

of Europe, but at those of China. After the discovery of the mines
of Peru, the silver mines of Europe were, the greater part of them,

The coarse, and still more the precious metals, when separated
from the ore, are so valuable, that they can generally bear the ex-

abandoned. The value of silver was so much reduced, that their
produce could no longer pay the expense of working them, or

pense of a very long land, and of the most distant sea carriage.

replace, with a profit, the food, clothes, lodging, and other neces-

144

Adam Smith
saries which were consumed in that operation. This was the case,
too, with the mines of Cuba and St. Domingo, and even with the

of the greater part of the silver mines of Peru, the richest which
have been known in the world. If there had been no tax, this fifth

ancient mines of Peru, after the discovery of those of Potosi.
The price of every metal, at every mine, therefore, being regu-

would naturally have belonged to the landlord, and many mines
might have been wrought which could not then be wrought, be-

lated in some measure by its price at the most fertile mine in the
world that is actually wrought, it can, at the greater part of mines,

cause they could not afford this tax. The tax of the duke of Cornwall
upon tin is supposed to amount to more than five per cent. or one

do very little more than pay the expense of working, and can seldom afford a very high rent to the landlord. Rent accordingly,

twentieth part of the value; and whatever may be his proportion,
it would naturally, too, belong to the proprietor of the mine, if tin

seems at the greater part of mines to have but a small share in the
price of the coarse, and a still smaller in that of the precious met-

was duty free. But if you add one twentieth to one sixth, you will
find that the whole average rent of the tin mines of Cornwall, was

als. Labour and profit make up the greater part of both.
A sixth part of the gross produce may be reckoned the average

to the whole average rent of the silver mines of Peru, as thirteen to
twelve. But the silver mines of Peru are not now able to pay even

rent of the tin mines of Cornwall, the most fertile that are known
in the world, as we are told by the Rev. Mr. Borlace, vice-warden

this low rent; and the tax upon silver was, in 1736, reduced from
one fifth to one tenth. Even this tax upon silver, too, gives more

of the stannaries. Some, he says, afford more, and some do not
afford so much. A sixth part of the gross produce is the rent, too,

temptation to smuggling than the tax of one twentieth upon tin;
and smuggling must be much easier in the precious than in the

of several very fertile lead mines in Scotland.
In the silver mines of Peru, we are told by Frezier and Ulloa, the

bulky commodity. The tax of the king of Spain, accordingly, is
said to be very ill paid, and that of the duke of Cornwall very well.

proprietor frequently exacts no other acknowledgment from the
undertaker of the mine, but that he will grind the ore at his mill,

Rent, therefore, it is probable, makes a greater part of the price of
tin at the most fertile tin mines than it does of silver at the most

paying him the ordinary multure or price of grinding. Till 1736,
indeed, the tax of the king of Spain amounted to one fifth of the

fertile silver mines in the world. After replacing the stock employed in working those different mines, together with its ordi-

standard silver, which till then might be considered as the real rent

nary profits, the residue which remains to the proprietor is greater,

145

The Wealth of Nations
it seems, in the coarse, than in the precious metal.
Neither are the profits of the undertakers of silver mines com-

bounder becomes the real proprietor of the mine, and may either
work it himself, or give it in lease to another, without the consent

monly very great in Peru. The same most respectable and wellinformed authors acquaint us, that when any person undertakes

of the owner of the land, to whom, however, a very small acknowledgment must be paid upon working it. In both regulations, the

to work a new mine in Peru, he is universally looked upon as a
man destined to bankruptcy and ruin, and is upon that account

sacred rights of private property are sacrificed to the supposed
interests of public revenue.

shunned and avoided by every body. Mining, it seems, is considered there in the same light as here, as a lottery, in which the prizes

The same encouragement is given in Peru to the discovery and
working of new gold mines; and in gold the king’s tax amounts

do not compensate the blanks, though the greatness of some tempts
many adventurers to throw away their fortunes in such unpros-

only to a twentieth part of the standard rental. It was once a fifth,
and afterwards a tenth, as in silver; but it was found that the work

perous projects.
As the sovereign, however, derives a considerable part of his rev-

could not bear even the lowest of these two taxes. If it is rare,
however, say the same authors, Frezier and Ulloa, to find a person

enue from the produce of silver mines, the law in Peru gives every
possible encouragement to the discovery and working of new ones.

who has made his fortune by a silver, it is still much rarer to find
one who has done so by a gold mine. This twentieth part seems to

Whoever discovers a new mine, is entitled to measure off two
hundred and forty-six feet in length, according to what he sup-

be the whole rent which is paid by the greater part of the gold
mines of Chili and Peru. Gold, too, is much more liable to be

poses to be the direction of the vein, and half as much in breadth.
He becomes proprietor of this portion of the mine, and can work

smuggled than even silver; not only on account of the superior
value of the metal in proportion to its bulk, but on account of the

it without paving any acknowledgment to the landlord. The interest of the duke of Cornwall has given occasion to a regulation

peculiar way in which nature produces it. Silver is very seldom
found virgin, but, like most other metals, is generally mineralized

nearly of the same kind in that ancient dutchy. In waste and uninclosed lands, any person who discovers a tin mine may mark out

with some other body, from which it is impossible to separate it in
such quantities as will pay for the expense, but by a very laborious

its limits to a certain extent, which is called bounding a mine. The

and tedious operation, which cannot well be carried on but in

146

Adam Smith
work-houses erected for the purpose, and, therefore, exposed to
the inspection of the king’s officers. Gold, on the contrary, is al-

beyond which no scarcity can ever raise it. Increase the scarcity of
gold to a certain degree, and the smallest bit of it may become

most always found virgin. It is sometimes found in pieces of some
bulk; and, even when mixed, in small and almost insensible par-

more precious than a diamond, and exchange for a greater quantity of other goods.

ticles, with sand, earth, and other extraneous bodies, it can be
separated from them by a very short and simple operation, which

The demand for those metals arises partly from their utility, and
partly from their beauty. If you except iron, they are more useful

can be carried on in any private house by any body who is possessed of a small quantity of mercury. If the king’s tax, therefore, is

than, perhaps, any other metal. As they are less liable to rust and
impurity, they can more easily be kept clean; and the utensils,

but ill paid upon silver, it is likely to be much worse paid upon
gold; and rent must make a much smaller part of the price of gold

either of the table or the kitchen, are often, upon that account,
more agreeable when made of them. A silver boiler is more cleanly

than that of silver.
The lowest price at which the precious metals can be sold, or

than a lead, copper, or tin one; and the same quality would render
a gold boiler still better than a silver one. Their principal merit,

the smallest quantity of other goods for which they can be exchanged, during any considerable time, is regulated by the same

however, arises from their beauty, which renders them peculiarly
fit for the ornaments of dress and furniture. No paint or dye can

principles which fix the lowest ordinary price of all other goods.
The stock which must commonly be employed, the food, clothes,

give so splendid a colour as gilding. The merit of their beauty is
greatly enhanced by their scarcity. With the greater part of rich

and lodging, which must commonly be consumed in bringing
them from the mine to the market, determine it. It must at least

people, the chief enjoyment of riches consists in the parade of
riches; which, in their eye, is never so complete as when they ap-

be sufficient to replace that stock, with the ordinary profits.
Their highest price, however, seems not to be necessarily deter-

pear to possess those decisive marks of opulence which nobody
can possess but themselves. In their eyes, the merit of an object,

mined by any thing but the actual scarcity or plenty of these metals themselves. It is not determined by that of any other commod-

which is in any degree either useful or beautiful, is greatly enhanced by its scarcity, or by the great labour which it requires to

ity, in the same manner as the price of coals is by that of wood,

collect any considerable quantity of it; a labour which nobody can

147

The Wealth of Nations
afford to pay but themselves. Such objects they are willing to purchase at a higher price than things much more beautiful and use-

the working.
As the prices, both of the precious metals and of the precious

ful, but more common. These qualities of utility, beauty, and scarcity, are the original foundation of the high price of those metals,

stones, is regulated all over the world by their price at the most
fertile mine in it, the rent which a mine of either can afford to its

or of the great quantity of other goods for which they can everywhere be exchanged. This value was antecedent to, and indepen-

proprietor is in proportion, not to its absolute, but to what may
be called its relative fertility, or to its superiority over other mines

dent of their being employed as coin, and was the quality which
fitted them for that employment. That employment, however, by

of the same kind. If new mines were discovered, as much superior
to those of Potosi, as they were superior to those of Europe, the

occasioning a new demand, and by diminishing the quantity which
could be employed in any other way, may have afterwards con-

value of silver might be so much degraded as to render even the
mines of Potosi not worth the working. Before the discovery of

tributed to keep up or increase their value.
The demand for the precious stones arises altogether from their

the Spanish West Indies, the most fertile mines in Europe may
have afforded as great a rent to their proprietors as the richest

beauty. They are of no use but as ornaments; and the merit of
their beauty is greatly enhanced by their scarcity, or by the diffi-

mines in Peru do at present. Though the quantity of silver was
much less, it might have exchanged for an equal quantity of other

culty and expense of getting them from the mine. Wages and profit
accordingly make up, upon most occasions, almost the whole of

goods, and the proprietor’s share might have enabled him to purchase or command an equal quantity either of labour or of com-

the high price. Rent comes in but for a very small share, frequently
for no share; and the most fertile mines only afford any consider-

modities.
The value, both of the produce and of the rent, the real revenue

able rent. When Tavernier, a jeweller, visited the diamond mines
of Golconda and Visiapour, he was informed that the sovereign of

which they afforded, both to the public and to the proprietor,
might have been the same.

the country, for whose benefit they were wrought, had ordered all
of them to be shut up except those which yielded the largest and

The most abundant mines, either of the precious metals, or of
the precious stones, could add little to the wealth of the world. A

finest stones. The other, it seems, were to the proprietor not worth

produce, of which the value is principally derived from its scar-

148

Adam Smith
city, is necessarily degraded by its abundance. A service of plate,
and the other frivolous ornaments of dress and furniture, could be

abundance of food, of which, in consequence of the improvement
of land, many people have the disposal beyond what they them-

purchased for a smaller quantity of commodities; and in this would
consist the sole advantage which the world could derive from that

selves can consume, is the great cause of the demand, both for the
precious metals and the precious stones, as well as for every other

abundance.
It is otherwise in estates above ground. The value, both of their

conveniency and ornament of dress, lodging, household furniture, and equipage. Food not only constitutes the principal part

produce and of their rent, is in proportion to their absolute, and
not to their relative fertility. The land which produces a certain

of the riches of the world, but it is the abundance of food which
gives the principal part of their value to many other sorts of riches.

quantity of food, clothes, and lodging, can always feed, clothe,
and lodge, a certain number of people; and whatever may be the

The poor inhabitants of Cuba and St. Domingo, when they were
first discovered by the Spaniards, used to wear little bits of gold as

proportion of the landlord, it will always give him a proportionable command of the labour of those people, and of the com-

ornaments in their hair and other parts of their dress. They seemed
to value them as we would do any little pebbles of somewhat more

modities with which that labour can supply him. The value of the
most barren land is not diminished by the neighbourhood of the

than ordinary beauty, and to consider them as just worth the picking up, but not worth the refusing to any body who asked them,

most fertile. On the contrary, it is generally increased by it. The
great number of people maintained by the fertile lands afford a

They gave them to their new guests at the first request, without
seeming to think that they had made them any very valuable

market to many parts of the produce of the barren, which they
could never have found among those whom their own produce

present. They were astonished to observe the rage of the Spaniards
to obtain them; and had no notion that there could anywhere be

could maintain.
Whatever increases the fertility of land in producing food, in-

a country in which many people had the disposal of so great a
superfluity of food; so scanty always among themselves, that, for a

creases not only the value of the lands upon which the improvement is bestowed, but contributes likewise to increase that of many

very small quantity of those glittering baubles, they would willingly give as much as might maintain a whole family for many

other lands, by creating a new demand for their produce. That

years. Could they have been made to understand this, the passion

149

The Wealth of Nations
of the Spaniards would not have surprised them.

accidents had not, upon some occasions, increased the supply of
some of them in a still greater proportion than the demand.

PART III. — Of the variations in the Proportion between the
respective Values of that sort of Produce which always affords Rent,

The value of a free-stone quarry, for example, will necessarily
increase with the increasing improvement and population of the

and of that which sometimes does, and sometimes does not, afford Rent.

country round about it, especially if it should be the only one in
the neighbourhood. But the value of a silver mine, even though

The increasing abundance of food, in consequence of the increasing improvement and cultivation, must necessarily increase

there should not be another within a thousand miles of it, will not
necessarily increase with the improvement of the country in which

the demand for every part of the produce of land which is not
food, and which can be applied either to use or to ornament. In

it is situated. The market for the produce of a free-stone quarry
can seldom extend more than a few miles round about it, and the

the whole progress of improvement, it might, therefore, be expected there should be only one variation in the comparative val-

demand must generally be in proportion to the improvement and
population of that small district; but the market for the produce

ues of those two different sorts of produce. The value of that sort
which sometimes does, and sometimes does not afford rent, should

of a silver mine may extend over the whole known world. Unless
the world in general. therefore, be advancing in improvement and

constantly rise in proportion to that which always affords some
rent. As art and industry advance, the materials of clothing and

population, the demand for silver might not be at all increased by
the improvement even of a large country in the neighbourhood of

lodging, the useful fossils and materials of the earth, the precious
metals and the precious stones, should gradually come to be more

the mine. Even though the world in general were improving, yet
if, in the course of its improvements, new mines should be discov-

and more in demand, should gradually exchange for a greater and
a greater quantity of food; or, in other words, should gradually

ered, much more fertile than any which had been known before,
though the demand for silver would necessarily increase, yet the

become dearer and dearer. This, accordingly, has been the case
with most of these things upon most occasions, and would have

supply might increase in so much a greater proportion, that the
real price of that metal might gradually fall; that is, any given

been the case with all of them upon all occasions, if particular

quantity, a pound weight of it, for example, might gradually pur-

150

Adam Smith
chase or command a smaller and a smaller quantity of labour, or
exchange for a smaller and a smaller quantity of corn, the princi-

events which can happen in the progress of improvement; and
during the course of the four centuries preceding the present, if

pal part of the subsistence of the labourer.
The great market for silver is the commercial and civilized part

we may judge by what has happened both in France and Great
Britain, each of those three different combinations seems to have

of the world.
If, by the general progress of improvement, the demand of this

taken place in the European market, and nearly in the same order,
too, in which I have here set them down.

market should increase, while, at the same time, the supply did
not increase in the same proportion, the value of silver would

Digression concerning the Variations in the value of Silver during the Course of the Four last Centuries.

gradually rise in proportion to that of corn. Any given quantity of
silver would exchange for a greater and a greater quantity of corn;

First Period. — In 1350, and for some time before, the average
price of the quarter of wheat in England seems not to have been

or, in other words, the average money price of corn would gradually become cheaper and cheaper.

estimated lower than four ounces of silver, Tower weight, equal to
about twenty shillings of our present money. From this price it

If, on the contrary, the supply, by some accident, should increase, for many years together, in a greater proportion than the

seems to have fallen gradually to two ounces of silver, equal to
about ten shillings of our present money, the price at which we

demand, that metal would gradually become cheaper and cheaper;
or, in other words, the average money price of corn would, in

find it estimated in the beginning of the sixteenth century, and at
which it seems to have continued to be estimated till about 1570.

spite of all improvements, gradually become dearer and dearer.
But if, on the other hand, the supply of that metal should in-

In 1350, being the 25th of Edward III. was enacted what is
called the Statute of Labourers. In the preamble, it complains much

crease nearly in the same proportion as the demand, it would continue to purchase or exchange for nearly the same quantity of corn;

of the insolence of servants, who endeavoured to raise their wages
upon their masters. It therefore ordains, that all servants and

and the average money price of corn would, in spite of all improvements. continue very nearly the same.

labourers should, for the future, be contented with the same wages
and liveries (liveries in those times signified not only clothes, but

These three seem to exhaust all the possible combinations of

provisions) which they had been accustomed to receive in the 20th

151

The Wealth of Nations
year of the king, and the four preceding years; that, upon this
account, their livery-wheat should nowhere be estimated higher

the fourteenth century, and for some time before, the common
price of wheat was not less than four ounces of silver the quarter,

than tenpence a-bushel, and that it should always be in the option
of the master to deliver them either the wheat or the money.

and that of other grain in proportion.
In 1309, Ralph de Born, prior of St Augustine’s, Canterbury,

Tenpence: a-bushel, therefore, had, in the 25th of Edward III.
been reckoned a very moderate price of wheat, since it required a

gave a feast upon his installation-day, of which William Thorn
has preserved, not only the bill of fare, but the prices of many

particular statute to oblige servants to accept of it in exchange for
their usual livery of provisions; and it had been reckoned a reason-

particulars. In that feast were consumed, 1st, fifty-three quarters
of wheat, which cost nineteen pounds, or seven shillings, and

able price ten years before that, or in the 16th year of the king, the
term to which the statute refers. But in the 16th year of Edward

twopence a-quarter, equal to about one-and-twenty shillings and
sixpence of our present money; 2dly, fifty-eight quarters of malt,

III. tenpence contained about half an ounce of silver, Tower weight,
and was nearly equal to half-a-crown of our present money. Four

which cost seventeen pounds ten shillings, or six shillings a-quarter, equal to about eighteen shillings of our present money; 3dly,

ounces of silver, Tower weight, therefore, equal to six shillings and
eightpence of the money of those times, and to near twenty shil-

twenty quarters of oats, which cost four pounds, or four shillings
a-quarter, equal to about twelve shillings of our present money.

lings of that of the present, must have been reckoned a moderate
price for the quarter of eight bushels.

The prices of malt and oats seem here to lie higher than their
ordinary proportion to the price of wheat.

This statute is surely a better evidence of what was reckoned, in
those times, a moderate price of grain, than the prices of some

These prices are not recorded, on account of their extraordinary
dearness or cheapness, but are mentioned accidentally, as the prices

particular years, which have generally been recorded by historians
and other writers, on account of their extraordinary dearness or

actually paid for large quantities of grain consumed at a feast,
which was famous for its magnificence.

cheapness, and from which, therefore, it is difficult to form any
judgment concerning what may have been the ordinary price. There

In 1262, being the 51st of Henry III. was revived an ancient
statute, called the assize of bread and ale, which, the king says in

are, besides, other reasons for believing that, in the beginning of

the preamble, had been made in the times of his progenitors, some

152

Adam Smith
time kings of England. It is probably, therefore, as old at least as
the time of his grandfather, Henry II. and may have been as old as

the sixteenth century, what was reckoned the reasonable and moderate, that is, the ordinary or average price of wheat, seems to have

the Conquest. It regulates the price of bread according as the prices
of wheat may happen to be, from one shilling to twenty shillings

sunk gradually to about one half of this price; so as at last to have
fallen to about two ounces of silver, Tower weight, equal to about

the quarter of the money of those times. But statutes of this kind
are generally presumed to provide with equal care for all devia-

ten shillings of our present money. It continued to be estimated at
this price till about 1570.

tions from the middle price, for those below it, as well as for those
above it. Ten shillings, therefore, containing six ounces of silver,

In the household book of Henry, the fifth earl of
Northumberland, drawn up in 1512 there are two different esti-

Tower weight, and equal to about thirty shillings of our present
money, must, upon this supposition, have been reckoned the

mations of wheat. In one of them it is computed at six shilling and
eightpence the quarter, in the other at five shillings and eightpence

middle price of the quarter of wheat when this statute was first
enacted, and must have continued to be so in the 51st of Henry

only. In 1512, six shillings and eightpence contained only two
ounces of silver, Tower weight, and were equal to about ten shil-

III. We cannot, therefore, be very wrong in supposing that the
middle price was not less than one-third of the highest price at

lings of our present money.
From the 25th of Edward III. to the beginning of the reign of

which this statute regulates the price of bread, or than six shillings
and eightpence of the money of those times, containing four ounces

Elizabeth, during the space of more than two hundred years, six
shillings and eightpence, it appears from several different statutes,

of silver, Tower weight.
From these different facts, therefore, we seem to have some rea-

had continued to be considered as what is called the moderate and
reasonable, that is, the ordinary or average price of wheat. The

son to conclude that, about the middle of the fourteenth century,
and for a considerable time before, the average or ordinary price

quantity of silver, however, contained in that nominal sum was,
during the course of this period, continually diminishing in con-

of the quarter of wheat was not supposed to be less than four
ounces of silver, Tower weight.

sequence of some alterations which were made in the coin. But
the increase of the value of silver had, it seems, so far compensated

From about the middle of the fourteenth to the beginning of

the diminution of the quantity of it contained in the same nomi-

153

The Wealth of Nations
nal sum, that the legislature did not think it worth while to attend
to this circumstance.

the price of the quarter should not exceed ten shillings, containing nearly the same quantity of silver as the like nominal sum does

Thus, in 1436, it was enacted, that wheat might be exported
without a licence when the price was so low as six shillings and

at present. This price had at this time, therefore, been considered
as what is called the moderate and reasonable price of wheat. It

eightpence: and in 1463, it was enacted, that no wheat should be
imported if the price was not above six shillings and eightpence

agrees nearly with the estimation of the Northumberland book in
1512.

the quarter: The legislature had imagined, that when the price was
so low, there could be no inconveniency in exportation, but that

That in France the average price of grain was, in the same manner, much lower in the end of the fifteenth and beginning of the

when it rose higher, it became prudent to allow of importation.
Six shillings and eightpence, therefore, containing about the same

sixteenth century, than in the two centuries preceding, has been
observed both by Mr Dupré de St Maur, and by the elegant au-

quantity of silver as thirteen shillings and fourpence of our present
money (one-third part less than the same nominal sum contained

thor of the Essay on the Policy of Grain. Its price, during the same
period, had probably sunk in the same manner through the greater

in the time of Edward III), had, in those times, been considered as
what is called the moderate and reasonable price of wheat.

part of Europe.
This rise in the value of silver, in proportion to that of corn,

In 1554, by the 1st and 2nd of Philip and Mary, and in 1558,
by the 1st of Elizabeth, the exportation of wheat was in the same

may either have been owing altogether to the increase of the demand for that metal, in consequence of increasing improvement

manner prohibited, whenever the price of the quarter should exceed six shillings and eightpence, which did not then contain two

and cultivation, the supply, in the mean time, continuing the same
as before; or, the demand continuing the same as before, it may

penny worth more silver than the same nominal sum does at
present. But it had soon been found, that to restrain the exporta-

have been owing altogether to the gradual diminution of the supply: the greater part of the mines which were then known in the

tion of wheat till the price was so very low, was, in reality, to prohibit it altogether. In 1562, therefore, by the 5th of Elizabeth, the

world being much exhausted, and, consequently, the expense of
working them much increased; or it may have been owing partly

exportation of wheat was allowed from certain ports, whenever

to the one, and partly to the other of those two circumstances. In

154

Adam Smith
the end of the fifteenth and beginning of the sixteenth centuries,
the greater part of Europe was approaching towards a more settled

increase of wealth, so its value diminishes as it quantity increases.
In their observations upon the prices of corn, three different

from of government than it had enjoyed for several ages before.
The increase of security would naturally increase industry and

circumstances seem frequently to have misled them.
First, in ancient times, almost all rents were paid in kind; in a

improvement; and the demand for the precious metals, as well as
for every other luxury and ornament, would naturally increase

certain quantity of corn, cattle, poultry, etc. It sometimes happened, however, that the landlord would stipulate, that he should

with the increase of riches. A greater annual produce would require a greater quantity of coin to circulate it; and a greater num-

be at liberty to demand of the tenant, either the annual payment
in kind or a certain sum of money instead of it. The price at which

ber of rich people would require a greater quantity of plate and
other ornaments of silver. It is natural to suppose, too, that the

the payment in kind was in this manner exchanged for a certain
sum of money, is in Scotland called the conversion price. As the

greater part of the mines which then supplied the European market with silver might be a good deal exhausted, and have become

option is always in the landlord to take either the substance or the
price, it is necessary, for the safety of the tenant, that the conver-

more expensive in the working. They had been wrought, many of
them, from the time of the Romans.

sion price should rather be below than above the average market
price. In many places, accordingly, it is not much above one half

It has been the opinion, however, of the greater part of those
who have written upon the prices of commodities in ancient times,

of this price. Through the greater part of Scotland this custom
still continues with regard to poultry, and in some places with

that, from the Conquest, perhaps from the invasion of Julius Caesar, till the discovery of the mines of America, the value of silver

regard to cattle. It might probably have continued to take place,
too, with regard to corn, had not the institution of the public fiars

was continually diminishing. This opinion they seem to have been
led into, partly by the observations which they had occasion to

put an end to it. These are annual valuations, according to the
judgment of an assize, of the average price of all the different sorts

make upon the prices both of corn and of some other parts of the
rude produce of land, and partly by the popular notion, that as

of grain, and of all the different qualities of each, according to the
actual market price in every different county. This institution ren-

the quantity of silver naturally increases in every country with the

dered it sufficiently safe for the tenant, and much more conve-

155

The Wealth of Nations
nient for the landlord, to convert, as they call it, the corn rent,
rather at what should happen to be the price of the fiars of each

this lowest price. But the transcribers of those statutes seem frequently to have thought it sufficient to copy the regulation as far

year, than at any certain fixed price. But the writers who have
collected the prices of corn in ancient times seem frequently to

as the three or four first and lowest prices; saving in this manner
their own labour, and judging, I suppose, that this was enough to

have mistaken what is called in Scotland the conversion price for
the actual market price. Fleetwood acknowledges, upon one occa-

show what proportion ought to be observed in all higher prices.
Thus, in the assize of bread and ale, of the 51st of Henry III. the

sion, that he had made this mistake. As he wrote his book, however, for a particular purpose, he does not think proper to make

price of bread was regulated according to the different prices of
wheat, from one shilling to twenty shillings the quarter of the

this acknowledgment till after transcribing this conversion price
fifteen times. The price is eight shillings the quarter of wheat. This

money of those times. But in the manuscripts from which all the
different editions of the statutes, preceding that of Mr Ruffhead,

sum in 1423, the year at which he begins with it, contained the
same quantity of silver as sixteen shillings of our present money.

were printed, the copiers had never transcribed this regulation
beyond the price of twelve shillings. Several writers, therefore, be-

But in 1562, the year at which he ends with it, it contained no
more than the same nominal sum does at present.

ing misled by this faulty transcription, very naturally conclude
that the middle price, or six shillings the quarter, equal to about

Secondly, they have been misled by the slovenly manner in which
some ancient statutes of assize had been sometimes transcribed by

eighteen shillings of our present money, was the ordinary or average price of wheat at that time.

lazy copiers, and sometimes, perhaps, actually composed by the
legislature.

In the statute of Tumbrel and Pillory, enacted nearly about the
same time, the price of ale is regulated according to every sixpence

The ancient statutes of assize seem to have begun always with
determining what ought to be the price of bread and ale when the

rise in the price of barley, from two shillings, to four shillings the
quarter. That four shillings, however, was not considered as the

price of wheat and barley were at the lowest; and to have proceeded gradually to determine what it ought to be, according as

highest price to which barley might frequently rise in those times,
and that these prices were only given as an example of the propor-

the prices of those two sorts of grain should gradually rise above

tion which ought to be observed in all other prices, whether higher

156

Adam Smith
or lower, we may infer from the last words of the statute: “Et sic
deinceps crescetur vel diminuetur per sex denarios.” The expres-

remaining cases, according to what is above written, having respect to the price of corn.”

sion is very slovenly, but the meaning is plain enough, “that the
price of ale is in this manner to be increased or diminished ac-

Thirdly, they seem to have been misled too, by the very low
price at which wheat was sometimes sold in very ancient times;

cording to every sixpence rise or fall in the price of barley.” In the
composition of this statute, the legislature itself seems to have been

and to have imagined, that as its lowest price was then much lower
than in later times its ordinary price must likewise have been much

as negligent as the copiers were in the transcription of the other.
In an ancient manuscript of the Regiam Majestatem, an old

lower. They might have found, however, that in those ancient times
its highest price was fully as much above, as its lowest price was

Scotch law book, there is a statute of assize, in which the price of
bread is regulated according to all the different prices of wheat,

below any thing that had ever been known in later times. Thus, in
1270, Fleetwood gives us two prices of the quarter of wheat. The

from tenpence to three shillings the Scotch boll, equal to about
half an English quarter. Three shillings Scotch, at the time when

one is four pounds sixteen shillings of the money of those times,
equal to fourteen pounds eight shillings of that of the present; the

this assize is supposed to have been enacted, were equal to about
nine shillings sterling of our present money Mr Ruddiman seems

other is six pounds eight shillings, equal to nineteen pounds four
shillings of our present money. No price can be found in the end

{See his Preface to Anderson’s Diplomata Scotiae.} to conclude
from this, that three shillings was the highest price to which wheat

of the fifteenth, or beginning of the sixteenth century, which approaches to the extravagance of these. The price of corn, though

ever rose in those times, and that tenpence, a shilling, or at most
two shillings, were the ordinary prices. Upon consulting the manu-

at all times liable to variation varies most in those turbulent and
disorderly societies, in which the interruption of all commerce

script, however, it appears evidently, that all these prices are only
set down as examples of the proportion which ought to be ob-

and communication hinders the plenty of one part of the country
from relieving the scarcity of another. In the disorderly state of

served between the respective prices of wheat and bread. The last
words of the statute are “reliqua judicabis secundum praescripta,

England under the Plantagenets, who governed it from about the
middle of the twelfth till towards the end of the fifteenth century,

habendo respectum ad pretium bladi.” —“You shall judge of the

one district might be in plenty, while another, at no great dis-

157

The Wealth of Nations
tance, by having its crop destroyed, either by some accident of the
seasons, or by the incursion of some neighbouring baron, might

century it begins to rise again. The prices, indeed, which Fleetwood
has been able to collect, seem to have been those chiefly which

be suffering all the horrors of a famine; and yet if the lands of
some hostile lord were interposed between them, the one might

were remarkable for extraordinary dearness or cheapness; and I do
not pretend that any very certain conclusion can be drawn from

not be able to give the least assistance to the other. Under the
vigorous administration of the Tudors, who governed England

them. So far, however, as they prove any thing at all, they confirm
the account which I have been endeavouring to give. Fleetwood

during the latter part of the fifteenth, and through the whole of
the sixteenth century, no baron was powerful enough to dare to

himself, however, seems, with most other writers, to have believed,
that, during all this period, the value of silver, in consequence of

disturb the public security.
The reader will find at the end of this chapter all the prices of

its increasing abundance, was continually diminishing. The prices
of corn, which he himself has collected, certainly do not agree

wheat which have been collected by Fleetwood, from 1202 to 1597,
both inclusive, reduced to the money of the present times, and

with this opinion. They agree perfectly with that of Mr Dupré de
St Maur, and with that which I have been endeavouring to ex-

digested, according to the order of time, into seven divisions of
twelve years each. At the end of each division, too, he will find the

plain. Bishop Fleetwood and Mr Dupré de St Maur are the two
authors who seem to have collected, with the greatest diligence

average price of the twelve years of which it consists. In that long
period of time, Fleetwood has been able to collect the prices of no

and fidelity, the prices of things in ancient times. It is some what
curious that, though their opinions are so very different, their facts,

more than eighty years; so that four years are wanting to make out
the last twelve years. I have added, therefore, from the accounts of

so far as they relate to the price of corn at least, should coincide so
very exactly.

Eton college, the prices of 1598, 1599, 1600, and 1601. It is the
only addition which I have made. The reader will see, that from

It is not, however, so much from the low price of corn, as from
that of some other parts of the rude produce of land, that the

the beginning of the thirteenth till after the middle of the sixteenth century, the average price of each twelve years grows gradu-

most judicious writers have inferred the great value of silver in
those very ancient times. Corn, it has been said, being a sort of

ally lower and lower; and that towards the end of the sixteenth

manufacture, was, in those rude ages, much dearer in proportion

158

Adam Smith
than the greater part of other commodities; it is meant, I suppose,
than the greater part of unmanufactured commodities, such as

high, but that the real value of those commodities is very low.
Labour, it must always be remembered, and not any particular

cattle, poultry, game of all kinds, etc. That in those times of poverty and barbarism these were proportionably much cheaper than

commodity, or set of commodities, is the real measure of the value
both of silver and of all other commodities.

corn, is undoubtedly true. But this cheapness was not the effect of
the high value of silver, but of the low value of those commodities.

But in countries almost waste, or but thinly inhabited, cattle,
poultry, game of all kinds, etc. as they are the spontaneous pro-

It was not because silver would in such times purchase or represent a greater quantity of labour, but because such commodities

ductions of Nature, so she frequently produces them in much
greater quantities than the consumption of the inhabitants requires.

would purchase or represent a much smaller quantity than in times
of more opulence and improvement. Silver must certainly be

In such a state of things, the supply commonly exceeds the demand. In different states of society, in different states of improve-

cheaper in Spanish America than in Europe; in the country where
it is produced, than in the country to which it is brought, at the

ment, therefore, such commodities will represent, or be equivalent, to very different quantities of labour.

expense of a long carriage both by land and by sea, of a freight,
and an insurance. One-and-twenty pence halfpenny sterling, how-

In every state of society, in every stage of improvement, corn is
the production of human industry. But the average produce of

ever, we are told by Ulloa, was, not many years ago, at Buenos
Ayres, the price of an ox chosen from a herd of three or four hun-

every sort of industry is always suited, more or less exactly, to the
average consumption; the average supply to the average demand.

dred. Sixteen shillings sterling, we are told by Mr Byron, was the
price of a good horse in the capital of Chili. In a country naturally

In every different stage of improvement, besides, the raising of
equal quantities of corn in the same soil and climate, will, at an

fertile, but of which the far greater part is altogether uncultivated,
cattle, poultry, game of all kinds, etc. as they can be acquired with

average, require nearly equal quantities of labour; or, what comes
to the same thing, the price of nearly equal quantities; the con-

a very small quantity of labour, so they will purchase or command
but a very small quantity. The low money price for which they

tinual increase of the productive powers of labour, in an improved
state of cultivation, being more or less counterbalanced by the

may be sold, is no proof that the real value of silver is there very

continual increasing price of cattle, the principal instruments of

159

The Wealth of Nations
agriculture. Upon all these accounts, therefore, we may rest assured, that equal quantities of corn will, in every state of society,

except upon holidays, and other extraordinary occasions. The
money price of labour, therefore, depends much more upon the

in every stage of improvement, more nearly represent, or be equivalent to, equal quantities of labour, than equal quantities of any

average money price of corn, the subsistence of the labourer, than
upon that of butcher’s meat, or of any other part of the rude pro-

other part of the rude produce of land. Corn, accordingly, it has
already been observed, is, in all the different stages of wealth and

duce of land. The real value of gold and silver, therefore, the real
quantity of labour which they can purchase or command, depends

improvement, a more accurate measure of value than any other
commodity or set of commodities. In all those different stages,

much more upon the quantity of corn which they can purchase or
command, than upon that of butcher’s meat, or any other part of

therefore, we can judge better of the real value of silver, by comparing it with corn, than by comparing it with any other com-

the rude produce of land.
Such slight observations, however, upon the prices either of corn

modity or set of commodities.
Corn, besides, or whatever else is the common and favourite

or of other commodities, would not probably have misled so many
intelligent authors, had they not been influenced at the same time

vegetable food of the people, constitutes, in every civilized country, the principal part of the subsistence of the labourer. In conse-

by the popular notion, that as the quantity of silver naturally increases in every country with the increase of wealth, so its value

quence of the extension of agriculture, the land of every country
produces a much greater quantity of vegetable than of animal food,

diminishes as its quantity increases. This notion, however, seems
to be altogether groundless.

and the labourer everywhere lives chiefly upon the wholesome
food that is cheapest and most abundant. Butcher’s meat, except

The quantity of the precious metals may increase in any country from two different causes; either, first, from the increased abun-

in the most thriving countries, or where labour is most highly
rewarded, makes but an insignificant part of his subsistence; poultry

dance of the mines which supply it; or, secondly, from the increased wealth of the people, from the increased produce of their

makes a still smaller part of it, and game no part of it. In France,
and even in Scotland, where labour is somewhat better rewarded

annual labour. The first of these causes is no doubt necessarily
connected with the diminution of the value of the precious met-

than in France, the labouring poor seldom eat butcher’s meat,

als; but the second is not.

160

Adam Smith
When more abundant mines are discovered, a greater quantity
of the precious metals is brought to market; and the quantity of

with the wealth of every country; so, whatever be the state of the
mines, it is at all times naturally higher in a rich than in a poor

the necessaries and conveniencies of life for which they must be
exchanged being the same as before, equal quantities of the metals

country. Gold and silver, like all other commodities, naturally seek
the market where the best price is given for them, and the best

must be exchanged for smaller quantities of commodities. So far,
therefore, as the increase of the quantity of the precious metals in

price is commonly given for every thing in the country which can
best afford it. Labour, it must be remembered, is the ultimate price

any country arises from the increased abundance of the mines, it
is necessarily connected with some diminution of their value.

which is paid for every thing; and in countries where labour is
equally well rewarded, the money price of labour will be in pro-

When, on the contrary, the wealth of any country increases,
when the annual produce of its labour becomes gradually greater

portion to that of the subsistence of the labourer. But gold and
silver will naturally exchange for a greater quantity of subsistence

and greater, a greater quantity of coin becomes necessary in order
to circulate a greater quantity of commodities: and the people, as

in a rich than in a poor country; in a country which abounds with
subsistence, than in one which is but indifferently supplied with

they can afford it, as they have more commodities to give for it,
will naturally purchase a greater and a greater quantity of plate.

it. If the two countries are at a great distance, the difference may
be very great; because, though the metals naturally fly from the

The quantity of their coin will increase from necessity; the quantity of their plate from vanity and ostentation, or from the same

worse to the better market, yet it may be difficult to transport
them in such quantities as to bring their price nearly to a level in

reason that the quantity of fine statues, pictures, and of every other
luxury and curiosity, is likely to increase among them. But as statu-

both. If the countries are near, the difference will be smaller, and
may sometimes be scarce perceptible; because in this case the trans-

aries and painters are not likely to be worse rewarded in times of
wealth and prosperity, than in times of poverty and depression, so

portation will be easy. China is a much richer country than any
part of Europe, and the difference between the price of subsis-

gold and silver are not likely to be worse paid for.
The price of gold and silver, when the accidental discovery of

tence in China and in Europe is very great. Rice in China is much
cheaper than wheat is any where in Europe. England is a much

more abundant mines does not keep it down, as it naturally rises

richer country than Scotland, but the difference between the money

161

The Wealth of Nations
price of corn in those two countries is much smaller, and is but
just perceptible. In proportion to the quantity or measure, Scotch

real recompence of labour in different countries, it must be remembered, is naturally regulated, not by their actual wealth or poverty,

corn generally appears to be a good deal cheaper than English;
but, in proportion to its quality, it is certainly somewhat dearer.

but by their advancing, stationary, or declining condition.
Gold and silver, as they are naturally of the greatest value among

Scotland receives almost every year very large supplies from England, and every commodity must commonly be somewhat dearer

the richest, so they are naturally of the least value among the poorest
nations. Among savages, the poorest of all nations, they are scarce

in the country to which it is brought than in that from which it
comes. English corn, therefore, must be dearer in Scotland than

of any value.
In great towns, corn is always dearer than in remote parts of the

in England; and yet in proportion to its quality, or to the quantity
and goodness of the flour or meal which can be made from it, it

country. This, however, is the effect, not of the real cheapness of
silver, but of the real dearness of corn. It does not cost less labour

cannot commonly be sold higher there than the Scotch corn which
comes to market in competition with it.

to bring silver to the great town than to the remote parts of the
country; but it costs a great deal more to bring corn.

The difference between the money price of labour in China and
in Europe, is still greater than that between the money price of

In some very rich and commercial countries, such as Holland
and the territory of Genoa, corn is dear for the same reason that it

subsistence; because the real recompence of labour is higher in
Europe than in China, the greater part of Europe being in an

is dear in great towns. They do not produce enough to maintain
their inhabitants. They are rich in the industry and skill of their

improving state, while China seems to be standing still. The money
price of labour is lower in Scotland than in England, because the

artificers and manufacturers, in every sort of machinery which
can facilitate and abridge labour; in shipping, and in all the other

real recompence of labour is much lower: Scotland, though advancing to greater wealth, advances much more slowly than En-

instruments and means of carriage and commerce: but they are
poor in corn, which, as it must be brought to them from distant

gland. The frequency of emigration from Scotland, and the rarity
of it from England, sufficiently prove that the demand for labour

countries, must, by an addition to its price, pay for the carriage
from those countries. It does not cost less labour to bring silver to

is very different in the two countries. The proportion between the

Amsterdam than to Dantzic; but it costs a great deal more to bring

162

Adam Smith
corn. The real cost of silver must be nearly the same in both places;
but that of corn must be very different. Diminish the real opu-

things in ancient times, therefore, had, during this period, no reason to infer the diminution of the value of silver from any obser-

lence either of Holland or of the territory of Genoa, while the
number of their inhabitants remains the same; diminish their power

vations which they had made upon the prices either of corn, or of
other commodities, they had still less reason to infer it from any

of supplying themselves from distant countries; and the price of
corn, instead of sinking with that diminution in the quantity of

supposed increase of wealth and improvement.
Second Period. — But how various soever may have been the

their silver, which must necessarily accompany this declension,
either as its cause or as its effect, will rise to the price of a famine.

opinions of the learned concerning the progress of the value of
silver during the first period, they are unanimous concerning it

When we are in want of necessaries, we must part with all superfluities, of which the value, as it rises in times of opulence and

during the second.
From about 1570 to about 1640, during a period of about sev-

prosperity, so it sinks in times of poverty and distress. It is otherwise with necessaries. Their real price, the quantity of labour which

enty years, the variation in the proportion between the value of
silver and that of corn held a quite opposite course. Silver sunk in

they can purchase or command, rises in times of poverty and distress, and sinks in times of opulence and prosperity, which are

its real value, or would exchange for a smaller quantity of labour
than before; and corn rose in its nominal price, and, instead of

always times of great abundance; for they could not otherwise be
times of opulence and prosperity. Corn is a necessary, silver is only

being commonly sold for about two ounces of silver the quarter,
or about ten shillings of our present money, came to be sold for six

a superfluity.
Whatever, therefore, may have been the increase in the quantity

and eight ounces of silver the quarter, or about thirty and forty
shillings of our present money.

of the precious metals, which, during the period between the
middle of the fourteenth and that of the sixteenth century, arose

The discovery of the abundant mines of America seems to have
been the sole cause of this diminution in the value of silver, in

from the increase of wealth and improvement, it could have no
tendency to diminish their value, either in Great Britain, or in my

proportion to that of corn. It is accounted for, accordingly, in the
same manner by every body; and there never has been any dis-

other part of Europe. If those who have collected the prices of

pute, either about the fact, or about the cause of it. The greater

163

The Wealth of Nations
part of Europe was, during this period, advancing in industry and
improvement, and the demand for silver must consequently have

of eight bushels of middle wheat comes out to have been £ 1:19:6,
or about seven ounces and two-thirds of an ounce of silver.

been increasing; but the increase of the supply had, it seems, so far
exceeded that of the demand, that the value of that metal sunk

Third Period. —Between 1630 and 1640, or about 1636, the
effect of the discovery of the mines of America, in reducing the

considerably. The discovery of the mines of America, it is to be
observed, does not seem to have had any very sensible effect upon

value of silver, appears to have been completed, and the value of
that metal seems never to have sunk lower in proportion to that of

the prices of things in England till after 1570; though even the
mines of Potosi had been discovered more than twenty years before.

corn than it was about that time. It seems to have risen somewhat
in the course of the present century, and it had probably begun to

From 1595 to 1620, both inclusive, the average price of the
quarter of nine bushels of the best wheat, at Windsor market,

do so, even some time before the end of the last.
From 1637 to 1700, both inclusive, being the sixty-four last

appears, from the accounts of Eton college, to have been £ 2:1:6
9/13. From which sum, neglecting the fraction, and deducting a

years of the last century the average price of the quarter of nine
bushels of the best wheat, at Windsor market, appears, from the

ninth, or 4s. 7 1/3d., the price of the quarter of eight bushels
comes out to have been £ 1:16:10 2/3. And from this sum, ne-

same accounts, to have been £ 2:11:0 1/3, which is only 1s. 0 1/
3d. dearer than it had been during the sixteen years before. But, in

glecting likewise the fraction, and deducting a ninth, or 4s. 1 1/
9d., for the difference between the price of the best wheat and that

the course of these sixty-four years, there happened two events,
which must have produced a much greater scarcity of corn than

of the middle wheat, the price of the middle wheat comes out to
have been about £ 1:12:8 8/9, or about six ounces and one-third

what the course of the season is would otherwise have occasioned,
and which, therefore, without supposing any further reduction in

of an ounce of silver.
From 1621 to 1636, both inclusive, the average price of the same

the value of silver, will much more than account for this very small
enhancement of price.

measure of the best wheat, at the same market, appears, from the
same accounts, to have been £ 2:10s.; from which, making the like

The first of these events was the civil war, which, by discouraging tillage and interrupting commerce, must have raised the price

deductions as in the foregoing case, the average price of the quarter

of corn much above what the course of the seasons would other-

164

Adam Smith
wise have occasioned. It must have had this effect, more or less, at
all the different markets in the kingdom, but particularly at those

and thereby hindering the abundance of one year from compensating the scarcity of another, to raise the price in the home mar-

in the neighbourhood of London, which require to be supplied
from the greatest distance. In 1648, accordingly, the price of the

ket. The scarcity which prevailed in England, from 1693 to 1699,
both inclusive, though no doubt principally owing to the badness

best wheat, at Windsor market, appears, from the same accounts,
to have been £ 4:5s., and, in 1649, to have been £ 4, the quarter of

of the seasons, and, therefore, extending through a considerable
part of Europe, must have been somewhat enhanced by the bounty.

nine bushels. The excess of those two years above £ 2:10s. (the
average price of the sixteen years preceding 1637 is £ 3:5s., which,

In 1699, accordingly, the further exportation of corn was prohibited for nine months.

divided among the sixty four last years of the last century, will
alone very nearly account for that small enhancement of price

There was a third event which occurred in the course of the
same period, and which, though it could not occasion any scar-

which seems to have taken place in them.) These, however, though
the highest, are by no means the only high prices which seem to

city of corn, nor, perhaps, any augmentation in the real quantity
of silver which was usually paid for it, must necessarily have occa-

have been occasioned by the civil wars.
The second event was the bounty upon the exportation of corn,

sioned some augmentation in the nominal sum. This event was
the great debasement of the silver coin, by clipping and wearing.

granted in 1688. The bounty, it has been thought by many people,
by encouraging tillage, may, in a long course of years, have occa-

This evil had begun in the reign of Charles II. and had gone on
continually increasing till 1695; at which time, as we may learn

sioned a greater abundance, and, consequently, a greater cheapness of corn in the home market, than what would otherwise have

from Mr Lowndes, the current silver coin was, at an average, near
five-and-twenty per cent. below its standard value. But the nomi-

taken place there. How far the bounty could produce this effect at
any time I shall examine hereafter: I shall only observe at present,

nal sum which constitutes the market price of every commodity is
necessarily regulated, not so much by the quantity of silver, which,

that between 1688 and 1700, it had not time to produce any such
effect. During this short period, its only effect must have been, by

according to the standard, ought to be contained in it, as by that
which, it is found by experience, actually is contained in it. This

encouraging the exportation of the surplus produce of every year,

nominal sum, therefore, is necessarily higher when the coin is much

165

The Wealth of Nations
debased by clipping and wearing, than when near to its standard
value.

weight than it is at present. In the course of the present century,
too, there has been no great public calamity, such as a civil war,

In the course of the present century, the silver coin has not at
any time been more below its standard weight than it is at present.

which could either discourage tillage, or interrupt the interior commerce of the country. And though the bounty which has taken

But though very much defaced, its value has been kept up by that
of the gold coin, for which it is exchanged. For though, before the

place through the greater part of this century, must always raise
the price of corn somewhat higher than it otherwise would be in

late recoinage, the gold coin was a good deal defaced too, it was
less so than the silver. In 1695, on the contrary, the value of the

the actual state of tillage; yet, as in the course of this century, the
bounty has had full time to produce all the good effects com-

silver coin was not kept up by the gold coin; a guinea then commonly exchanging for thirty shillings of the worn and clipt silver.

monly imputed to it to encourage tillage, and thereby to increase
the quantity of corn in the home market, it may, upon the prin-

Before the late recoinage of the gold, the price of silver bullion was
seldom higher than five shillings and sevenpence an ounce, which

ciples of a system which I shall explain and examine hereafter, be
supposed to have done something to lower the price of that com-

is but fivepence above the mint price. But in 1695, the common
price of silver bullion was six shillings and fivepence an ounce,

modity the one way, as well as to raise it the other. It is by many
people supposed to have done more. In the sixty-four years of the

{Lowndes’s Essay on the Silver Coin, 68.} which is fifteen pence
above the mint price. Even before the late recoinage of the gold,

present century, accordingly, the average price of the quarter of
nine bushels of the best wheat, at Windsor market, appears, by

therefore, the coin, gold and silver together, when compared with
silver bullion, was not supposed to be more than eight per cent.

the accounts of Eton college, to have been £ 2:0:6 10/32, which is
about ten shillings and sixpence, or more than five-and-twenty

below its standard value, In 1695, on the contrary, it had been
supposed to be near five-and-twenty per cent. below that value.

percent. cheaper than it had been during the sixty-four last years
of the last century; and about nine shillings and sixpence cheaper

But in the beginning of the present century, that is, immediately
after the great recoinage in King William’s time, the greater part of

than it had been during the sixteen years preceding 1636, when
the discovery of the abundant mines of America may be supposed

the current silver coin must have been still nearer to its standard

to have produced its full effect; and about one shilling cheaper

166

Adam Smith
than it had been in the twenty-six years preceding 1620, before
that discovery can well be supposed to have produced its full ef-

posed to be the average market price. Mr King had judged eightand-twenty shillings the quarter to be at that time the ordinary

fect. According to this account, the average price of middle wheat,
during these sixty-four first years of the present century, comes

contract price in years of moderate plenty. Before the scarcity occasioned by the late extraordinary course of bad seasons, it was, I

out to have been about thirty-two shillings the quarter of eight
bushels.

have been assured, the ordinary contract price in all common years.
In 1688 was granted the parliamentary bounty upon the expor-

The value of silver, therefore, seems to have risen somewhat in
proportion to that of corn during the course of the present cen-

tation of corn. The country gentlemen, who then composed a still
greater proportion of the legislature than they do at present, had

tury, and it had probably begun to do so even some time before
the end of the last.

felt that the money price of corn was falling. The bounty was an
expedient to raise it artificially to the high price at which it had

In 1687, the price of the quarter of nine bushels of the best wheat,

frequently been sold in the times of Charles I. and II. It was to
take place, therefore, till wheat was so high as fortyeight shillings

at Windsor market, was £ 1:5:2, the lowest price at which it had
ever been from 1595.

the quarter; that is, twenty shillings, or 5-7ths dearer than Mr
King had, in that very year, estimated the grower’s price to be in

In 1688, Mr Gregory King, a man famous for his knowledge in
matters of this kind, estimated the average price of wheat, in years

times of moderate plenty. If his calculations deserve any part of
the reputation which they have obtained very universally, eight-

of moderate plenty, to be to the grower 3s. 6d. the bushel, or
eight-and-twenty shillings the quarter. The grower’s price I under-

and-forty shillings the quarter was a price which, without some
such expedient as the bounty, could not at that time be expected,

stand to be the same with what is sometimes called the contract
price, or the price at which a farmer contracts for a certain num-

except in years of extraordinary scarcity. But the government of
King William was not then fully settled. It was in no condition to

ber of years to deliver a certain quantity of corn to a dealer. As a
contract of this kind saves the farmer the expense and trouble of

refuse anything to the country gentlemen, from whom it was, at
that very time, soliciting the first establishment of the annual land-

marketing, the contract price is generally lower than what is sup-

tax.

167

The Wealth of Nations
The value of silver, therefore, in proportion to that of corn, had
probably risen somewhat before the end of the last century; and it

But, without the bounty, it may be said the state of tillage would
not have been the same. What may have been the effects of this

seems to have continued to do so during the course of the greater
part of the present, though the necessary operation of the bounty

institution upon the agriculture of the country, I shall endeavour
to explain hereafter, when I come to treat particularly of bounties.

must have hindered that rise from being so sensible as it otherwise
would have been in the actual state of tillage.

I shall only observe at present, that this rise in the value of silver,
in proportion to that of corn, has not been peculiar to England. It

In plentiful years, the bounty, by occasioning an extraordinary
exportation, necessarily raises the price of corn above what it oth-

has been observed to have taken place in France during the same
period, and nearly in the same proportion, too, by three very faith-

erwise would be in those years. To encourage tillage, by keeping
up the price of corn, even in the most plentiful years, was the

ful, diligent, and laborious collectors of the prices of corn, Mr
Dupré de St Maur, Mr Messance, and the author of the Essay on

avowed end of the institution.
In years of great scarcity, indeed, the bounty has generally been

the Police of Grain. But in France, till 1764, the exportation of
grain was by law prohibited; and it is somewhat difficult to sup-

suspended. It must, however, have had some effect upon the prices
of many of those years. By the extraordinary exportation which it

pose, that nearly the same diminution of price which took place
in one country, notwithstanding this prohibition, should, in an-

occasions in years of plenty, it must frequently hinder the plenty
of one year from compensating the scarcity of another.

other, be owing to the extraordinary encouragement given to exportation.

Both in years of plenty and in years of scarcity, therefore, the
bounty raises the price of corn above what it naturally would be in

It would be more proper, perhaps, to consider this variation in
the average money price of corn as the effect rather of some gradual

the actual state of tillage. If during the sixty-four first years of the
present century, therefore, the average price has been lower than

rise in the real value of silver in the European market, than of any
fall in the real average value of corn. Corn, it has already been

during the sixty-four last years of the last century, it must, in the
same state of tillage, have been much more so, had it not been for

observed, is, at distant periods of time, a more accurate measure
of value than either silver or, perhaps, any other commodity. When,

this operation of the bounty.

after the discovery of the abundant mines of America, corn rose to

168

Adam Smith
three and four times its former money price, this change was universally ascribed, not to any rise in the real value of corn, but to a

wonderful than ten years of extraordinary plenty. The low price of
corn, from 1741 to 1750, both inclusive, may very well be set in

fall in the real value of silver. If, during the sixty-four first years of
the present century, therefore, the average money price of corn

opposition to its high price during these last eight or ten years.
From 1741 to 1750, the average price of the quarter of nine bush-

has fallen somewhat below what it had been during the greater
part of the last century, we should, in the same manner, impute

els of the best wheat, at Windsor market, it appears from the accounts of Eton college, was only £ 1:13:9 4/5, which is nearly

this change, not to any fall in the real value of corn, but to some
rise in the real value of silver in the European market.

6s.3d. below the average price of the sixty-four first years of the
present century. The average price of the quarter of eight bushels

The high price of corn during these ten or twelve years past,
indeed, has occasioned a suspicion that the real value of silver still

of middle wheat comes out, according to this account, to have
been, during these ten years, only £ 1:6:8.

continues to fall in the European market. This high price of corn,
however, seems evidently to have been the effect of the extraordi-

Between 1741 and 1750, however, the bounty must have hindered the price of corn from falling so low in the home market as

nary unfavourableness of the seasons, and ought, therefore, to be
regarded, not as a permanent, but as a transitory and occasional

it naturally would have done. During these ten years, the quantity
of all sorts of grain exported, it appears from the custom-house

event. The seasons, for these ten or twelve years past, have been
unfavourable through the greater part of Europe; and the disor-

books, amounted to no less than 8,029,156 quarters, one bushel.
The bounty paid for this amounted to £ 1,514,962:17:4 1/2. In

ders of Poland have very much increased the scarcity in all those
countries, which, in dear years, used to be supplied from that

1749, accordingly, Mr Pelham, at that time prime minister, observed to the house of commons, that, for the three years preced-

market. So long a course of bad seasons, though not a very common event, is by no means a singular one; and whoever has in-

ing, a very extraordinary sum had been paid as bounty for the
exportation of corn. He had good reason to make this observa-

quired much into the history of the prices of corn in former times,
will be at no loss to recollect several other examples of the same

tion, and in the following year he might have had still better. In
that single year, the bounty paid amounted to no less than £

kind. Ten years of extraordinary scarcity, besides, are not more

324,176:10:6. {See Tracts on the Corn Trade, Tract 3,} It is un-

169

The Wealth of Nations
necessary to observe how much this forced exportation must have
raised the price of corn above what it otherwise would have been

during the course of the present century. This, however, seems to
be the effect, not so much of any diminution in the value of silver

in the home market.
At the end of the accounts annexed to this chapter the reader

in the European market, as of an increase in the demand for labour
in Great Britain, arising from the great, and almost universal pros-

will find the particular account of those ten years separated from
the rest. He will find there, too, the particular account of the pre-

perity of the country. In France, a country not altogether so prosperous, the money price of labour has, since the middle of the last

ceding ten years, of which the average is likewise below, though
not so much below, the general average of the sixty-four first years

century, been observed to sink gradually with the average money
price of corn. Both in the last century and in the present, the day

of the century. The year 1740, however, was a year of extraordinary scarcity. These twenty years preceding 1750 may very well be

wages of common labour are there said to have been pretty uniformly about the twentieth part of the average price of the septier

set in opposition to the twenty preceding 1770. As the former
were a good deal below the general average of the century, not-

of wheat; a measure which contains a little more than four Winchester bushels. In Great Britain, the real recompence of labour, it

withstanding the intervention of one or two dear years; so the
latter have been a good deal above it, notwithstanding the inter-

has already been shewn, the real quantities of the necessaries and
conveniencies of life which are given to the labourer, has increased

vention of one or two cheap ones, of 1759, for example. If the
former have not been as much below the general average as the

considerably during the course of the present century. The rise in its
money price seems to have been the effect, not of any diminution of

latter have been above it, we ought probably to impute it to the
bounty. The change has evidently been too sudden to be ascribed

the value of silver in the general market of Europe, but of a rise in
the real price of labour, in the particular market of Great Britain,

to any change in the value of silver, which is always slow and
gradual. The suddenness of the effect can be accounted for only

owing to the peculiarly happy circumstances of the country.
For some time after the first discovery of America, silver would

by a cause which can operate suddenly, the accidental variations
of the seasons.

continue to sell at its former, or not much below its former price.
The profits of mining would for some time be very great, and

The money price of labour in Great Britain has, indeed, risen

much above their natural rate. Those who imported that metal

170

Adam Smith
into Europe, however, would soon find that the whole annual
importation could not be disposed of at this high price. Silver

or to reduce the value of silver in the European market as low as it
could well fall, while it continued to pay this tax to the king of

would gradually exchange for a smaller and a smaller quantity of
goods. Its price would sink gradually lower and lower, till it fell to

Spain. Ninety years is time sufficient to reduce any commodity, of
which there is no monopoly, to its natural price, or to the lowest

its natural price; or to what was just sufficient to pay, according to
their natural rates, the wages of the labour, the profits of the stock,

price at which, while it pays a particular tax, it can continue to be
sold for any considerable time together.

and the rent of the land, which must be paid in order to bring it
from the mine to the market. In the greater part of the silver mines

The price of silver in the European market might, perhaps, have
fallen still lower, and it might have become necessary either to

of Peru, the tax of the king of Spain, amounting to a tenth of the
gross produce, eats up, it has already been observed, the whole

reduce the tax upon it, not only to one-tenth, as in 1736, but to
one twentieth, in the same manner as that upon gold, or to give

rent of the land. This tax was originally a half; it soon afterwards
fell to a third, then to a fifth, and at last to a tenth, at which late it

up working the greater part of the American mines which are now
wrought. The gradual increase of the demand for silver, or the

still continues. In the greater part of the silver mines of Peru, this,
it seems, is all that remains, after replacing the stock of the under-

gradual enlargement of the market for the produce of the silver
mines of America, is probably the cause which has prevented this

taker of the work, together with its ordinary profits; and it seems
to be universally acknowledged that these profits, which were once

from happening, and which has not only kept up the value of
silver in the European market, but has perhaps even raised it some-

very high, are now as low as they can well be, consistently with
carrying on the works.

what higher than it was about the middle of the last century.
Since the first discovery of America, the market for the produce

The tax of the king of Spain was reduced to a fifth of the registered silver in 1504 {Solorzano, vol, ii.}, one-and-forty years be-

of its silver mines has been growing gradually more and more extensive.

fore 1545, the date of the discovery of the mines of Potosi. In the
course of ninety years, or before 1636, these mines, the most fer-

First, the market of Europe has become gradually more and more
extensive. Since the discovery of America, the greater part of Eu-

tile in all America, had time sufficient to produce their full effect,

rope has been much improved. England, Holland, France, and

171

The Wealth of Nations
Germany; even Sweden, Denmark, and Russia, have all advanced
considerably, both in agriculture and in manufactures. Italy seems

partly for coin, and partly for plate, requires a continual augmenting supply of silver through a great continent where there never

not to have gone backwards. The fall of Italy preceded the conquest of Peru. Since that time it seems rather to have recovered a

was any demand before. The greater part, too, of the Spanish and
Portuguese colonies, are altogether new markets. New Granada,

little. Spain and Portugal, indeed, are supposed to have gone backwards. Portugal, however, is but a very small part of Europe, and

the Yucatan, Paraguay, and the Brazils, were, before discovered by
the Europeans, inhabited by savage nations, who had neither arts

the declension of Spain is not, perhaps, so great as is commonly
imagined. In the beginning of the sixteenth century, Spain was a

nor agriculture. A considerable degree of both has now been introduced into all of them. Even Mexico and Peru, though they

very poor country, even in comparison with France, which has
been so much improved since that time. It was the well known

cannot be considered as altogether new markets, are certainly much
more extensive ones than they ever were before. After all the won-

remark of the emperor Charles V. who had travelled so frequently
through both countries, that every thing abounded in France, but

derful tales which have been published concerning the splendid
state of those countries in ancient times, whoever reads, with any

that every thing was wanting in Spain. The increasing produce of
the agriculture and manufactures of Europe must necessarily have

degree of sober judgment, the history of their first discovery and
conquest, will evidently discern that, in arts, agriculture, and com-

required a gradual increase in the quantity of silver coin to circulate it; and the increasing number of wealthy individuals must

merce, their inhabitants were much more ignorant than the Tartars of the Ukraine are at present. Even the Peruvians, the more

have required the like increase in the quantity of their plate and
other ornaments of silver.

civilized nation of the two, though they made use of gold and
silver as ornaments, had no coined money of any kind. Their whole

Secondly, America is itself a new market, for the produce of its
own silver mines; and as its advances in agriculture, industry, and

commerce was carried on by barter, and there was accordingly
scarce any division of labour among them. Those who cultivated

population, are much more rapid than those of the most thriving
countries in Europe, its demand must increase much more rap-

the ground, were obliged to build their own houses, to make their
own household furniture, their own clothes, shoes, and instru-

idly. The English colonies are altogether a new market, which,

ments of agriculture. The few artificers among them are said to

172

Adam Smith
have been all maintained by the sovereign, the nobles, and the
priests, and were probably their servants or slaves. All the ancient

of Chili and Peru is nearly the same; and as there seems to be no
reason to doubt of the good information of either, it marks an

arts of Mexico and Peru have never furnished one single manufacture to Europe. The Spanish armies, though they scarce ever ex-

increase which is scarce inferior to that of the English colonies.
America, therefore, is a new market for the produce of its own

ceeded five hundred men, and frequently did not amount to half
that number, found almost everywhere great difficulty in procur-

silver mines, of which the demand must increase much more rapidly than that of the most thriving country in Europe.

ing subsistence. The famines which they are said to have occasioned almost wherever they went, in countries, too, which at the

Thirdly, the East Indies is another market for the produce of the
silver mines of America, and a market which, from the time of the

same time are represented as very populous and well cultivated,
sufficiently demonstrate that the story of this populousness and

first discovery of those mines, has been continually taking off a
greater and a greater quantity of silver. Since that time, the direct

high cultivation is in a great measure fabulous. The Spanish colonies are under a government in many respects less favourable to

trade between America and the East Indies, which is carried on by
means of the Acapulco ships, has been continually augmenting,

agriculture, improvement, and population, than that of the English colonies. They seem, however, to be advancing in all those

and the indirect intercourse by the way of Europe has been augmenting in a still greater proportion. During the sixteenth cen-

much more rapidly than any country in Europe. In a fertile soil
and happy climate, the great abundance and cheapness of land, a

tury, the Portuguese were the only European nation who carried
on any regular trade to the East Indies. In the last years of that

circumstance common to all new colonies, is, it seems, so great an
advantage, as to compensate many defects in civil government.

century, the Dutch began to encroach upon this monopoly, and
in a few years expelled them from their principal settlements in

Frezier, who visited Peru in 1713, represents Lima as containing
between twenty-five and twenty-eight thousand inhabitants. Ulloa,

India. During the greater part of the last century, those two nations divided the most considerable part of the East India trade

who resided in the same country between 1740 and 1746, represents it as containing more than fifty thousand. The difference in

between them; the trade of the Dutch continually augmenting in
a still greater proportion than that of the Portuguese declined.

their accounts of the populousness of several other principal towns

The English and French carried on some trade with India in the

173

The Wealth of Nations
last century, but it has been greatly augmented in the course of the
present. The East India trade of the Swedes and Danes began in

East India company before the late reduction of their shipping.
But in the East Indies, particularly in China and Indostan, the

the course of the present century. Even the Muscovites now trade
regularly with China, by a sort of caravans which go over land

value of the precious metals, when the Europeans first began to
trade to those countries, was much higher than in Europe; and it

through Siberia and Tartary to Pekin. The East India trade of all
these nations, if we except that of the French, which the last war

still continues to be so. In rice countries, which generally yield
two, sometimes three crops in the year, each of them more plenti-

had well nigh annihilated, has been almost continually augmenting. The increasing consumptions of East India goods in Europe

ful than any common crop of corn, the abundance of food must
be much greater than in any corn country of equal extent. Such

is, it seems, so great, as to afford a gradual increase of employment
to them all. Tea, for example, was a drug very little used in Eu-

countries are accordingly much more populous. In them, too, the
rich, having a greater superabundance of food to dispose of be-

rope, before the middle of the last century. At present, the value of
the tea annually imported by the English East India company, for

yond what they themselves can consume, have the means of purchasing a much greater quantity of the labour of other people.

the use of their own countrymen, amounts to more than a million
and a half a year; and even this is not enough; a great deal more

The retinue of a grandee in China or Indostan accordingly is, by
all accounts, much more numerous and splendid than that of the

being constantly smuggled into the country from the ports of
Holland, from Gottenburgh in Sweden, and from the coast of

richest subjects in Europe. The same superabundance of food, of
which they have the disposal, enables them to give a greater quan-

France, too, as long as the French East India company was in
prosperity. The consumption of the porcelain of China, of the

tity of it for all those singular and rare productions which nature
furnishes but in very small quantities; such as the precious metals

spiceries of the Moluccas, of the piece goods of Bengal, and of
innumerable other articles, has increased very nearly in a like pro-

and the precious stones, the great objects of the competition of
the rich. Though the mines, therefore, which supplied the Indian

portion. The tonnage, accordingly, of all the European shipping
employed in the East India trade, at any one time during the last

market, had been as abundant as those which supplied the European, such commodities would naturally exchange for a greater

century, was not, perhaps, much greater than that of the English

quantity of food in India than in Europe. But the mines which

174

Adam Smith
supplied the Indian market with the precious metals seem to have
been a good deal less abundant, and those which supplied it with

much lower in those great empires than it is anywhere in Europe.
Through the greater part of Europe, too, the expense of land-

the precious stones a good deal more so, than the mines which
supplied the European. The precious metals, therefore, would natu-

carriage increases very much both the real and nominal price of
most manufactures. It costs more labour, and therefore more

rally exchange in India for a somewhat greater quantity of the
precious stones, and for a much greater quantity of food than in

money, to bring first the materials, and afterwards the complete
manufacture to market. In China and Indostan, the extent and

Europe. The money price of diamonds, the greatest of all superfluities, would be somewhat lower, and that of food, the first of all

variety of inland navigations save the greater part of this labour,
and consequently of this money, and thereby reduce still lower

necessaries, a great deal lower in the one country than in the other.
But the real price of labour, the real quantity of the necessaries of

both the real and the nominal price of the greater part of their
manufactures. Upon all these accounts, the precious metals are a

life which is given to the labourer, it has already been observed, is
lower both in China and Indostan, the two great markets of India,

commodity which it always has been, and still continues to be,
extremely advantageous to carry from Europe to India. There is

than it is through the greater part of Europe. The wages of the
labourer will there purchase a smaller quantity of food: and as the

scarce any commodity which brings a better price there; or which,
in proportion to the quantity of labour and commodities which it

money price of food is much lower in India than in Europe, the
money price of labour is there lower upon a double account; upon

costs in Europe, will purchase or command a greater quantity of
labour and commodities in India. It is more advantageous, too, to

account both of the small quantity of food which it will purchase,
and of the low price of that food. But in countries of equal art and

carry silver thither than gold; because in China, and the greater
part of the other markets of India, the proportion between fine

industry, the money price of the greater part of manufactures will
be in proportion to the money price of labour; and in manufac-

silver and fine gold is but as ten, or at most as twelve to one;
whereas in Europe it is as fourteen or fifteen to one. In China, and

turing art and industry, China and Indostan, though inferior, seem
not to be much inferior to any part of Europe. The money price

the greater part of the other markets of India, ten, or at most
twelve ounces of silver, will purchase an ounce of gold; in Europe,

of the greater part of manufactures, therefore, will naturally be

it requires from fourteen to fifteen ounces. In the cargoes, there-

175

The Wealth of Nations
fore, of the greater part of European ships which sail to India,
silver has generally been one of the most valuable articles. It is the

thereby disqualified from ever afterwards appearing in the shape
of those metals, is said to amount to more than fifty thousand

most valuable article in the Acapulco ships which sail to Manilla.
The silver of the new continent seems, in this manner, to be one

pounds sterling. We may from thence form some notion how great
must be the annual consumption in all the different parts of the

of the principal commodities by which the commerce between
the two extremities of the old one is carried on; and it is by means

world, either in manufactures of the same kind with those of Birmingham, or in laces, embroideries, gold and silver stuffs, the gild-

of it, in a great measure, that those distant parts of the world are
connected with one another.

ing of books, furniture, etc. A considerable quantity, too, must be
annually lost in transporting those metals from one place to an-

In order to supply so very widely extended a market, the quantity of silver annually brought from the mines must not only be

other both by sea and by land. In the greater part of the governments of Asia, besides, the almost universal custom of concealing

sufficient to support that continued increase, both of coin and of
plate, which is required in all thriving countries; but to repair that

treasures in the bowels of the earth, of which the knowledge frequently dies with the person who makes the concealment, must

continual waste and consumption of silver which takes place in all
countries where that metal is used.

occasion the loss of a still greater quantity.
The quantity of gold and silver imported at both Cadiz and

The continual consumption of the precious metals in coin by
wearing, and in plate both by wearing and cleaning, is very sen-

Lisbon (including not only what comes under register, but what
may be supposed to be smuggled) amounts, according to the best

sible; and in commodities of which the use is so very widely extended, would alone require a very great annual supply. The con-

accounts, to about six millions sterling a-year.
According to Mr Meggens {Postscript to the Universal Merchant

sumption of those metals in some particular manufactures, though
it may not perhaps be greater upon the whole than this gradual

p. 15 and 16. This postscript was not printed till 1756, three years
after the publication of the book, which has never had a second

consumption, is, however, much more sensible, as it is much more
rapid. In the manufactures of Birmingham alone, the quantity of

edition. The postscript is, therefore, to be found in few copies; it
corrects several errors in the book.}, the annual importation of the

gold and silver annually employed in gilding and plating, and

precious metals into Spain, at an average of six years, viz. from

176

Adam Smith
1748 to 1753, both inclusive, and into Portugal, at an average of
seven years, viz. from 1747 to 1753, both inclusive, amounted in

gives the detail, too, of the particular places from which the gold
and silver were brought, and of the particular quantities of each

silver to 1,101,107 pounds weight, and in gold to 49,940 pounds
weight. The silver, at sixty two shillings the pound troy, amounts

metal, which according to the register, each of them afforded. He
informs us, too, that if we were to judge of the quantity of gold

to £ 3,413,431:10s. sterling. The gold, at forty-four guineas and a
half the pound troy, amounts to £ 2,333,446:14s. sterling. Both

annually imported from the Brazils to Lisbon, by the amount of
the tax paid to the king of Portugal, which it seems, is one-fifth of

together amount to £ 5,746,878:4s. sterling. The account of what
was imported under register, he assures us, is exact. He gives us

the standard metal, we might value it at eighteen millions of
cruzadoes, or forty-five millions of French livres, equal to about

the detail of the particular places from which the gold and silver
were brought, and of the particular quantity of each metal, which,

twenty millions sterling. On account of what may have been
smuggled, however, we may safely, he says, add to this sum an

according to the register, each of them afforded. He makes an
allowance, too, for the quantity of each metal which, he supposes,

eighth more, or £ 250,000 sterling, so that the whole will amount
to £ 2,250,000 sterling. According to this account, therefore, the

may have been smuggled. The great experience of this judicious
merchant renders his opinion of considerable weight.

whole annual importation of the precious metals into both Spain
and Portugal, mounts to about £ 6,075,000 sterling.

According to the eloquent, and sometimes well-informed, author of the Philosophical and Political History of the Establish-

Several other very well authenticated, though manuscript accounts, I have been assured, agree in making this whole annual

ment of the Europeans in the two Indies, the annual importation
of registered gold and silver into Spain, at an average of eleven

importation amount, at an average, to about six millions sterling;
sometimes a little more, sometimes a little less.

years, viz. from 1754 to 1764, both inclusive, amounted to
13,984,185 3/5 piastres of ten reals. On account of what may

The annual importation of the precious metals into Cadiz and
Lisbon, indeed, is not equal to the whole annual produce of the

have been smuggled, however, the whole annual importation, he
supposes, may have amounted to seventeen millions of piastres,

mines of America. Some part is sent annually by the Acapulco
ships to Manilla; some part is employed in a contraband trade,

which, at 4s. 6d. the piastre, is equal to £ 3,825,000 sterling. He

which the Spanish colonies carry on with those of other European

177

The Wealth of Nations
nations; and some part, no doubt, remains in the country. The
mines of America, besides, are by no means the only gold and

indeed, though harder, are put to much harder uses, and, as they
are of less value, less care is employed in their preservation. The

silver mines in the world. They, are, however, by far the most abundant. The produce of all the other mines which are known is in-

precious metals, however, are not necessarily immortal any more
than they, but are liable, too, to be lost, wasted, and consumed, in

significant, it is acknowledged, in comparison with their’s; and
the far greater part of their produce, it is likewise acknowledged, is

a great variety of ways.
The price of all metals, though liable to slow and gradual varia-

annually imported into Cadiz and Lisbon. But the consumption
of Birmingham alone, at the rate of fifty thousand pounds a-year,

tions, varies less from year to year than that of almost any other
part of the rude produce of land: and the price of the precious

is equal to the hundred-and-twentieth part of this annual importation, at the rate of six millions a-year. The whole annual con-

metals is even less liable to sudden variations than that of the coarse
ones. The durableness of metals is the foundation of this extraor-

sumption of gold and silver, therefore, in all the different countries of the world where those metals are used, may, perhaps, be

dinary steadiness of price. The corn which was brought to market
last year will be all, or almost all, consumed, long before the end

nearly equal to the whole annual produce. The remainder may be
no more than sufficient to supply the increasing demand of all

of this year. But some part of the iron which was brought from:
the mine two or three hundred years ago, may be still in use, and,

thriving countries. It may even have fallen so far short of this demand, as somewhat to raise the price of those metals in the Euro-

perhaps, some part of the gold which was brought from it two or
three thousand years ago. The different masses of corn, which, in

pean market.
The quantity of brass and iron annually brought from the mine

different years, must supply the consumption of the world, will
always be nearly in proportion to the respective produce of those

to the market, is out of all proportion greater than that of gold
and silver. We do not, however, upon this account, imagine that

different years. But the proportion between the different masses
of iron which may be in use in two different years, will be very

those coarse metals are likely to multiply beyond the demand, or
to become gradually cheaper and cheaper. Why should we imag-

little affected by any accidental difference in the produce of the
iron mines of those two years; and the proportion between the

ine that the precious metals are likely to do so? The coarse metals,

masses of gold will be still less affected by any such difference in

178

Adam Smith
the produce of the gold mines. Though the produce of the greater
part of metallic mines, therefore, varies, perhaps, still more from

India, have, in some of the English settlements, gradually reduced
the value of that metal in proportion to gold. In the mint of

year to year than that of the greater part of corn fields, those variations have not the same effect upon the price of the one species of

Calcutta, an ounce of fine gold is supposed to be worth fifteen
ounces of fine silver, in the same manner as in Europe. It is in the

commodities as upon that of the other.
Variations in the Proportion between the respective Values of

mint, perhaps, rated too high for the value which it bears in the
market of Bengal. In China, the proportion of gold to silver still

Gold and Silver.
Before the discovery of the mines of America, the value of fine

continues as one to ten, or one to twelve. In Japan, it is said to be
as one to eight.

gold to fine silver was regulated in the different mines of Europe,
between the proportions of one to ten and one to twelve; that is,

The proportion between the quantities of gold and silver annually imported into Europe, according to Mr Meggens’ account, is

an ounce of fine gold was supposed to be worth from ten to twelve
ounces of fine silver. About the middle of the last century, it came

as one to twenty-two nearly; that is, for one ounce of gold there
are imported a little more than twenty-two ounces of silver. The

to be regulated, between the proportions of one to fourteen and
one to fifteen; that is, an ounce of fine gold came to be supposed

great quantity of silver sent annually to the East Indies reduces, he
supposes, the quantities of those metals which remain in Europe

worth between fourteen and fifteen ounces of fine silver. Gold
rose in its nominal value, or in the quantity of silver which was

to the proportion of one to fourteen or fifteen, the proportion of
their values. The proportion between their values, he seems to

given for it. Both metals sunk in their real value, or in the quantity
of labour which they could purchase; but silver sunk more than

think, must necessarily be the same as that between their quantities, and would therefore be as one to twenty-two, were it not for

gold. Though both the gold and silver mines of America exceeded
in fertility all those which had ever been known before, the fertil-

this greater exportation of silver.
But the ordinary proportion between the respective values of

ity of the silver mines had, it seems, been proportionally still greater
than that of the gold ones.

two commodities is not necessarily the same as that between the
quantities of them which are commonly in the market. The price

The great quantities of silver carried annually from Europe to

of an ox, reckoned at ten guineas, is about three score times the

179

The Wealth of Nations
price of a lamb, reckoned at 3s. 6d. It would be absurd, however,
to infer from thence, that there are commonly in the market three

other, silver is a cheap, and gold a dear commodity. We ought
naturally to expect, therefore, that there should always be in the

score lambs for one ox; and it would be just as absurd to infer,
because an ounce of gold will commonly purchase from fourteen

market, not only a greater quantity, but a greater value of silver
than of gold. Let any man, who has a little of both, compare his

or fifteen ounces of silver, that there are commonly in the market
only fourteen or fifteen ounces of silver for one ounce of gold.

own silver with his gold plate, and he will probably find, that not
only the quantity, but the value of the former, greatly exceeds that

The quantity of silver commonly in the market, it is probable,
is much greater in proportion to that of gold, than the value of a

of the latter. Many people, besides, have a good deal of silver who
have no gold plate, which, even with those who have it, is gener-

certain quantity of gold is to that of an equal quantity of silver.
The whole quantity of a cheap commodity brought to market is

ally confined to watch-cases, snuff-boxes, and such like trinkets,
of which the whole amount is seldom of great value. In the British

commonly not only greater, but of greater value, than the whole
quantity of a dear one. The whole quantity of bread annually

coin, indeed, the value of the gold preponderates greatly, but it is
not so in that of all countries. In the coin of some countries, the

brought to market, is not only greater, but of greater value, than
the whole quantity of butcher’s meat; the whole quantity of

value of the two metals is nearly equal. In the Scotch coin, before
the union with England, the gold preponderated very little, though

butcher’s meat, than the whole quantity of poultry; and the whole
quantity of poultry, than the whole quantity of wild fowl. There

it did somewhat {See Ruddiman’s Preface to Anderson’s Diplomata,
etc. Scotiae.}, as it appears by the accounts of the mint. In the coin

are so many more purchasers for the cheap than for the dear commodity, that, not only a greater quantity of it, but a greater value

of many countries the silver preponderates. In France, the largest
sums are commonly paid in that metal, and it is there difficult to

can commonly be disposed of. The whole quantity, therefore, of
the cheap commodity, must commonly be greater in proportion

get more gold than what is necessary to carry about in your pocket.
The superior value, however, of the silver plate above that of the

to the whole quantity of the dear one, than the value of a certain
quantity of the dear one, is to the value of an equal quantity of the

gold, which takes place in all countries, will much more than compensate the preponderancy of the gold coin above the silver, which

cheap one. When we compare the precious metals with one an-

takes place only in some countries.

180

Adam Smith
Though, in one sense of the word, silver always has been, and
probably always will be, much cheaper than gold; yet, in another

as it affords both less rent and less profit, must, in the Spanish
market, be somewhat nearer to the lowest price for which it is

sense, gold may perhaps, in the present state of the Spanish market, be said to be somewhat cheaper than silver. A commodity

possible to bring it thither, than the price of Spanish silver. When
all expenses are computed, the whole quantity of the one metal, it

may be said to be dear or cheap not only according to the absolute
greatness or smallness of its usual price, but according as that price

would seem, cannot, in the Spanish market, be disposed of so
advantageously as the whole quantity of the other. The tax, in-

is more or less above the lowest for which it is possible to bring it
to market for any considerable time together. This lowest price is

deed, of the king of Portugal upon the gold of the Brazils, is the
same with the ancient tax of the king of Spain upon the silver of

that which barely replaces, with a moderate profit, the stock which
must be employed in bringing the commodity thither. It is the

Mexico and Peru; or one-fifth part of the standard metal. It may
therefore be uncertain, whether, to the general market of Europe,

price which affords nothing to the landlord, of which rent makes
not any component part, but which resolves itself altogether into

the whole mass of American gold comes at a price nearer to the
lowest for which it is possible to bring it thither, than the whole

wages and profit. But, in the present state of the Spanish market,
gold is certainly somewhat nearer to this lowest price than silver.

mass of American silver.
The price of diamonds and other precious stones may, perhaps,

The tax of the king of Spain upon gold is only one-twentieth part
of the standard metal, or five per cent.; whereas his tax upon silver

be still nearer to the lowest price at which it is possible to bring
them to market, than even the price of gold.

amounts to one-tenth part of it, or to ten per cent. In these taxes,
too, it has already been observed, consists the whole rent of the

Though it is not very probable that any part of a tax, which is
not only imposed upon one of the most proper subjects of taxa-

greater part of the gold and silver mines of Spanish America; and
that upon gold is still worse paid than that upon silver. The profits

tion, a mere luxury and superfluity, but which affords so very important a revenue as the tax upon silver, will ever be given up as

of the undertakers of gold mines, too, as they more rarely make a
fortune, must, in general, be still more moderate than those of the

long as it is possible to pay it; yet the same impossibility of paying
it, which, in 1736. made it necessary to reduce it from one-fifth to

undertakers of silver mines. The price of Spanish gold, therefore,

one-tenth, may in time make it necessary to reduce it still further;

181

The Wealth of Nations
in the same manner as it made it necessary to reduce the tax upon
gold to one-twentieth. That the silver mines of Spanish America,

not prevent altogether, must certainly retard, more or less, the rise
of the value of silver in the European market. In consequence of

like all other mines, become gradually more expensive in the working, on account of the greater depths at which it is necessary to

such reductions, many mines may be wrought which could not be
wrought before, because they could not afford to pay the old tax;

carry on the works, and of the greater expense of drawing out the
water, and of supplying them with fresh air at those depths, is

and the quantity of silver annually brought to market, must always be somewhat greater, and, therefore, the value of any given

acknowledged by everybody who has inquired into the state of
those mines.

quantity somewhat less, than it otherwise would have been. In
consequence of the reduction in 1736, the value of silver in the

These causes, which are equivalent to a growing scarcity of silver (for a commodity may be said to grow scarcer when it be-

European market, though it may not at this day be lower than
before that reduction, is, probably, at least ten per cent. lower

comes more difficult and expensive to collect a certain quantity of
it), must, in time, produce one or other of the three following

than it would have been, had the court of Spain continued to
exact the old tax.

events: The increase of the expense must either, first, be compensated altogether by a proportionable increase in the price of the

That, notwithstanding this reduction, the value of silver has,
during the course of the present century, begun to rise somewhat

metal; or, secondly, it must be compensated altogether by a proportionable diminution of the tax upon silver; or, thirdly, it must

in the European market, the facts and arguments which have been
alleged above, dispose me to believe, or more properly to suspect

be compensated partly by the one and partly by the other of those
two expedients. This third event is very possible. As gold rose in

and conjecture; for the best opinion which I can form upon this
subject, scarce, perhaps, deserves the name of belief. The rise, in-

its price in proportion to silver, notwithstanding a great diminution of the tax upon gold, so silver might rise in its price in pro-

deed, supposing there has been any, has hitherto been so very small,
that after all that has been said, it may, perhaps, appear to many

portion to labour and commodities, notwithstanding an equal
diminution of the tax upon silver.

people uncertain, not only whether this event has actually taken
place, but whether the contrary may not have taken place, or

Such successive reductions of the tax, however, though they may

whether the value of silver may not still continue to fall in the

182

Adam Smith
European market.
It must be observed, however, that whatever may be the sup-

The increase of the wealth of Europe, and the popular notion,
that as the quantity of the precious metals naturally increases with

posed annual importation of gold and silver, there must be a certain period at which the annual consumption of those metals will

the increase of wealth, so their value diminishes as their quantity
increases, may, perhaps, dispose many people to believe that their

be equal to that annual importation. Their consumption must
increase as their mass increases, or rather in a much greater pro-

value still continues to fall in the European market; and the still
gradually increasing price of many parts of the rude produce of

portion. As their mass increases, their value diminishes. They are
more used, and less cared for, and their consumption consequently

land may confirm them still farther in this opinion.
That that increase in the quantity of the precious metals, which

increases in a greater proportion than their mass. After a certain
period, therefore, the annual consumption of those metals must,

arises in any country from the increase of wealth, has no tendency
to diminish their value, I have endeavoured to shew already. Gold

in this manner, become equal to their annual importation, provided that importation is not continually increasing; which, in

and silver naturally resort to a rich country, for the same reason
that all sorts of luxuries and curiosities resort to it; not because

the present times, is not supposed to be the case.
If, when the annual consumption has become equal to the an-

they are cheaper there than in poorer countries, but because they
are dearer, or because a better price is given for them. It is the

nual importation, the annual importation should gradually diminish, the annual consumption may, for some time, exceed the

superiority of price which attracts them; and as soon as that superiority ceases, they necessarily cease to go thither.

annual importation. The mass of those metals may gradually and
insensibly diminish, and their value gradually and insensibly rise,

If you except corn, and such other vegetables as are raised altogether by human industry, that all other sorts of rude produce,

till the annual importation becoming again stationary, the annual
consumption will gradually and insensibly accommodate itself to

cattle, poultry, game of all kinds, the useful fossils and minerals of
the earth, etc. naturally grow dearer, as the society advances in

what that annual importation can maintain.
Grounds of the suspicion that the Value of Silver still continues

wealth and improvement, I have endeavoured to shew already.
Though such commodities, therefore, come to exchange for a

to decrease.

greater quantity of silver than before, it will not from thence fol-

183

The Wealth of Nations
low that silver has become really cheaper, or will purchase less
labour than before; but that such commodities have become re-

render the efforts of human industry, in multiplying this sort of
rude produce, more or less successful.

ally dearer, or will purchase more labour than before. It is not
their nominal price only, but their real price, which rises in the

First Sort. — The first sort of rude produce, of which the price
rises in the progress of improvement, is that which it is scarce in

progress of improvement. The rise of their nominal price is the
effect, not of any degradation of the value of silver, but of the rise

the power of human industry to multiply at all. It consists in those
things which nature produces only in certain quantities, and which

in their real price.
Different Effects of the Progress of Improvement upon three

being of a very perishable nature, it is impossible to accumulate
together the produce of many different seasons. Such are the greater

different sorts of rude Produce.
These different sorts of rude produce may be divided into three

part of rare and singular birds and fishes, many different sorts of
game, almost all wild-fowl, all birds of passage in particular, as

classes. The first comprehends those which it is scarce in the power
of human industry to multiply at all. The second, those which it

well as many other things. When wealth, and the luxury which
accompanies it, increase, the demand for these is likely to increase

can multiply in proportion to the demand. The third, those in
which the efficacy of industry is either limited or uncertain. In the

with them, and no effort of human industry may be able to increase the supply much beyond what it was before this increase of

progress of wealth and improvement, the real price of the first
may rise to any degree of extravagance, and seems not to be lim-

the demand. The quantity of such commodities, therefore, remaining the same, or nearly the same, while the competition to pur-

ited by any certain boundary. That of the second, though it may
rise greatly, has, however, a certain boundary, beyond which it

chase them is continually increasing, their price may rise to any
degree of extravagance, and seems not to be limited by any certain

cannot well pass for any considerable time together. That of the
third, though its natural tendency is to rise in the progress of im-

boundary. If woodcocks should become so fashionable as to sell
for twenty guineas a-piece, no effort of human industry could

provement, yet in the same degree of improvement it may sometimes happen even to fall, sometimes to continue the same, and

increase the number of those brought to market, much beyond
what it is at present. The high price paid by the Romans, in the

sometimes to rise more or less, according as different accidents

time of their greatest grandeur, for rare birds and fishes, may in

184

Adam Smith
this manner easily be accounted for. These prices were not the
effects of the low value of silver in those times, but of the high

tity of labour and commodities which four ounces will do at
present. When we read in Pliny, therefore, that Seius {Lib. X, c.

value of such rarities and curiosities as human industry could not
multiply at pleasure. The real value of silver was higher at Rome,

29.} bought a white nightingale, as a present for the empress
Agrippina, at the price of six thousand sestertii, equal to about

for sometime before, and after the fall of the republic, than it is
through the greater part of Europe at present. Three sestertii equal

fifty pounds of our present money; and that Asinius Celer {Lib.
IX, c. 17.} purchased a surmullet at the price of eight thousand

to about sixpence sterling, was the price which the republic paid
for the modius or peck of the tithe wheat of Sicily. This price,

sestertii, equal to about sixty-six pounds thirteen shillings and
fourpence of our present money; the extravagance of those prices,

however, was probably below the average market price, the obligation to deliver their wheat at this rate being considered as a tax

how much soever it may surprise us, is apt, notwithstanding, to
appear to us about one third less than it really was. Their real

upon the Sicilian farmers. When the Romans, therefore, had occasion to order more corn than the tithe of wheat amounted to,

price, the quantity of labour and subsistence which was given away
for them, was about one-third more than their nominal price is

they were bound by capitulation to pay for the surplus at the rate
of four sestertii, or eightpence sterling the peck; and this had prob-

apt to express to us in the present times. Seius gave for the nightingale the command of a quantity of labour and subsistence, equal

ably been reckoned the moderate and reasonable, that is, the ordinary or average contract price of those times; it is equal to about

to what £ 66:13: 4d. would purchase in the present times; and
Asinius Celer gave for a surmullet the command of a quantity

one-and-twenty shillings the quarter. Eight-and-twenty shillings
the quarter was, before the late years of scarcity, the ordinary con-

equal to what £ 88:17: 9d. would purchase. What occasioned the
extravagance of those high prices was, not so much the abundance

tract price of English wheat, which in quality is inferior to the
Sicilian, and generally sells for a lower price in the European mar-

of silver, as the abundance of labour and subsistence, of which
those Romans had the disposal, beyond what was necessary for

ket. The value of silver, therefore, in those ancient times, must
have been to its value in the present, as three to four inversely; that

their own use. The quantity of silver, of which they had the disposal, was a good deal less than what the command of the same

is, three ounces of silver would then have purchased the same quan-

quantity of labour and subsistence would have procured to them

185

The Wealth of Nations
in the present times.

the quantity of butcher’s meat, which the country naturally produces without labour or cultivation; and, by increasing the num-

Second sort. —The second sort of rude produce, of which the
price rises in the progress of improvement, is that which human

ber of those who have either corn, or, what comes to the same
thing, the price of corn, to give in exchange for it, increases the

industry can multiply in proportion to the demand. It consists in
those useful plants and animals, which, in uncultivated countries,

demand. The price of butcher’s meat, therefore, and, consequently,
of cattle, must gradually rise, till it gets so high, that it becomes as

nature produces with such profuse abundance, that they are of
little or no value, and which, as cultivation advances, are therefore

profitable to employ the most fertile and best cultivated lands in
raising food for them as in raising corn. But it must always be late

forced to give place to some more profitable produce. During a
long period in the progress of improvement, the quantity of these

in the progress of improvement before tillage can be so far extended as to raise the price of cattle to this height; and, till it has

is continually diminishing, while, at the same time, the demand
for them is continually increasing. Their real value, therefore, the

got to this height, if the country is advancing at all, their price
must be continually rising. There are, perhaps, some parts of Eu-

real quantity of labour which they will purchase or command,
gradually rises, till at last it gets so high as to render them as prof-

rope in which the price of cattle has not yet got to this height. It
had not got to this height in any part of Scotland before the Union.

itable a produce as any thing else which human industry can raise
upon the most fertile and best cultivated land. When it has got so

Had the Scotch cattle been always confined to the market of Scotland, in a country in which the quantity of land, which can be

high, it cannot well go higher. If it did, more land and more industry would soon be employed to increase their quantity.

applied to no other purpose but the feeding of cattle, is so great in
proportion to what can be applied to other purposes, it is scarce

When the price of cattle, for example, rises so high, that it is as
profitable to cultivate land in order to raise food for them as in

possible, perhaps, that their price could ever have risen so high as
to render it profitable to cultivate land for the sake of feeding

order to raise food for man, it cannot well go higher. If it did,
more corn land would soon be turned into pasture. The extension

them. In England, the price of cattle, it has already been observed,
seems, in the neighbourhood of London, to have got to this height

of tillage, by diminishing the quantity of wild pasture, diminishes

about the beginning of the last century; but it was much later,

186

Adam Smith
probably, before it got through the greater part of the remoter
counties, in some of which, perhaps, it may scarce yet have got to

produce of improved and cuitivated land, when they are allowed
to pasture it, that price will be still less sufficient to pay for that

it. Of all the different substances, however, which compose this
second sort of rude produce, cattle is, perhaps, that of which the

produce, when it must be collected with a good deal of additional
labour, and brought into the stable to them. In these circumstances,

price, in the progress of improvement, rises first to this height.
Till the price of cattle, indeed, has got to this height, it seems

therefore, no more cattle can with profit be fed in the stable than
what are necessary for tillage. But these can never afford manure

scarce possible that the greater part, even of those lands which are
capable of the highest cultivation, can be completely cultivated.

enough for keeping constantly in good condition all the lands
which they are capable of cultivating. What they afford, being

In all farms too distant from any town to carry manure from it,
that is, in the far greater part of those of every extensive country,

insufficient for the whole farm, will naturally be reserved for the
lands to which it can be most advantageously or conveniently ap-

the quantity of well cultivated land must be in proportion to the
quantity of manure which the farm itself produces; and this, again,

plied; the most fertile, or those, perhaps, in the neighbourhood of
the farm-yard. These, therefore, will be kept constantly in good

must be in proportion to the stock of cattle which are maintained
upon it. The land is manured, either by pasturing the cattle upon

condition, and fit for tillage. The rest will, the greater part of them,
be allowed to lie waste, producing scarce any thing but some mis-

it, or by feeding them in the stable, and from thence carrying out
their dung to it. But unless the price of the cattle be sufficient to

erable pasture, just sufficient to keep alive a few straggling, halfstarved cattle; the farm, though much overstocked in proportion

pay both the rent and profit of cultivated land, the farmer cannot
afford to pasture them upon it; and he can still less afford to feed

to what would be necessary for its complete cultivation, being
very frequently overstocked in proportion to its actual produce. A

them in the stable. It is with the produce of improved and cultivated land only that cattle can be fed in the stable; because, to

portion of this waste land, however, after having been pastured in
this wretched manner for six or seven years together, may be

collect the scanty and scattered produce of waste and unimproved
lands, would require too much labour, and be too expensive. It

ploughed up, when it will yield, perhaps, a poor crop or two of
bad oats, or of some other coarse grain; and then, being entirely

the price of the cattle, therefore, is not sufficient to pay for the

exhausted, it must be rested and pastured again as before, and

187

The Wealth of Nations
another portion ploughed up, to be in the same manner exhausted
and rested again in its turn. Such, accordingly, was the general

more difficult for them to acquire it; and, secondly, to their not
having yet had time to put their lands in condition to maintain

system of management all over the low country of Scotland before
the Union. The lands which were kept constantly well manured

this greater stock properly, supposing they were capable of acquiring it. The increase of stock and the improvement of land are two

and in good condition seldom exceeded a third or fourth part of
the whole farm, and sometimes did not amount to a fifth or a

events which must go hand in hand, and of which the one can
nowhere much outrun the other. Without some increase of stock,

sixth part of it. The rest were never manured, but a certain portion of them was in its turn, notwithstanding, regularly cultivated

there can be scarce any improvement of land, but there can be no
considerable increase of stock, but in consequence of a consider-

and exhausted. Under this system of management, it is evident,
even that part of the lands of Scotland which is capable of good

able improvement of land; because otherwise the land could not
maintain it. These natural obstructions to the establishment of a

cultivation, could produce but little in comparison of what it may
be capable of producing. But how disadvantageous soever this sys-

better system, cannot be removed but by a long course of frugality
and industry; and half a century or a century more, perhaps, must

tem may appear, yet, before the Union, the low price of cattle
seems to have rendered it almost unavoidable. If, notwithstanding

pass away before the old system, which is wearing out gradually,
can be completely abolished through all the different parts of the

a great rise in the price, it still continues to prevail through a considerable part of the country, it is owing in many places, no doubt,

country. Of all the commercial advantages, however, which Scotland has derived from the Union with England, this rise in the

to ignorance and attachment to old customs, but, in most places,
to the unavoidable obstructions which the natural course of things

price of cattle is, perhaps, the greatest. It has not only raised the
value of all highland estates, but it has, perhaps, been the princi-

opposes to the immediate or speedy establishment of a better system: first, to the poverty of the tenants, to their not having yet

pal cause of the improvement of the low country.
In all new colonies, the great quantity of waste land, which can

had time to acquire a stock of cattle sufficient to cultivate their
lands more completely, the same rise of price, which would render

for many years be applied to no other purpose but the feeding of
cattle, soon renders them extremely abundant; and in every thing

it advantageous for them to maintain a greater stock, rendering it

great cheapness is the necessary consequence of great abundance.

188

Adam Smith
Though all the cattle of the European colonies in America were
originally carried from Europe, they soon multiplied so much there,

time to form their flowers, or to shed their seeds. {Kalm’s Travels,
vol 1, pp. 343, 344.} The annual grasses were, it seems, the best

and became of so little value, that even horses were allowed to run
wild in the woods, without any owner thinking it worth while to

natural grasses in that part of North America; and when the Europeans first settled there, they used to grow very thick, and to rise

claim them. It must be a long time after the first establishment of
such colonies, before it can become profitable to feed cattle upon

three or four feet high. A piece of ground which, when he wrote,
could not maintain one cow, would in former times, he was as-

the produce of cultivated land. The same causes, therefore, the
want of manure, and the disproportion between the stock em-

sured, have maintained four, each of which would have given four
times the quantity of milk which that one was capable of giving.

ployed in cultivation and the land which it is destined to cultivate,
are likely to introduce there a system of husbandry, not unlike

The poorness of the pasture had, in his opinion, occasioned the
degradation of their cattle, which degenerated sensibly from me

that which still continues to take place in so many parts of Scotland. Mr Kalm, the Swedish traveller, when he gives an account of

generation to another. They were probably not unlike that stunted
breed which was common all over Scotland thirty or forty years

the husbandry of some of the English colonies in North America,
as he found it in 1749, observes, accordingly, that he can with

ago, and which is now so much mended through the greater part
of the low country, not so much by a change of the breed, though

difficulty discover there the character of the English nation, so
well skilled in all the different branches of agriculture. They make

that expedient has been employed in some places, as by a more
plentiful method of feeding them.

scarce any manure for their corn fields, he says; but when one
piece of ground has been exhausted by continual cropping, they

Though it is late, therefore, in the progress of improvement, before cattle can bring such a price as to render it profitable to culti-

clear and cultivate another piece of fresh land; and when that is
exhausted, proceed to a third. Their cattle are allowed to wander

vate land for the sake of feeding them; yet of all the different parts
which compose this second sort of rude produce, they are perhaps

through the woods and other uncultivated grounds, where they
are half-starved; having long ago extirpated almost all the annual

the first which bring this price; because, till they bring it, it seems
impossible that improvement can be brought near even to that de-

grasses, by cropping them too early in the spring, before they had

gree of perfection to which it has arrived in many parts of Europe.

189

The Wealth of Nations
As cattle are among the first, so perhaps venison is among the
last parts of this sort of rude produce which bring this price. The

farmer scarce any thing, so he can afford to sell them for very
little. Almost all that he gets is pure gain, and their price can scarce

price of venison in Great Britain, how extravagant soever it may
appear, is not near sufficient to compensate the expense of a deer

be so low as to discourage him from feeding this number. But in
countries ill cultivated, and therefore but thinly inhabited, the

park, as is well known to all those who have had any experience in
the feeding of deer. If it was otherwise, the feeding of deer would

poultry, which are thus raised without expense, are often fully
sufficient to supply the whole demand. In this state of things,

soon become an article of common farming, in the same manner
as the feeding of those small birds, called turdi, was among the

therefore, they are often as cheap as butcher’s meat, or any other
sort of animal food. But the whole quantity of poultry which the

ancient Romans. Varro and Columella assure us, that it was a most
profitable article. The fattening of ortolans, birds of passage which

farm in this manner produces without expense, must always be
much smaller than the whole quantity of butcher’s meat which is

arrive lean in the country, is said to be so in some parts of France.
If venison continues in fashion, and the wealth and luxury of Great

reared upon it; and in times of wealth and luxury, what is rare,
with only nearly equal merit, is always preferred to what is com-

Britain increase as they have done for some time past, its price
may very probably rise still higher than it is at present.

mon. As wealth and luxury increase, therefore, in consequence of
improvement and cultivation, the price of poultry gradually rises

Between that period in the progress of improvement, which
brings to its height the price of so necessary an article as cattle,

above that of butcher’s meat, till at last it gets so high, that it
becomes profitable to cultivate land for the sake of feeding them.

and that which brings to it the price of such a superfluity as venison, there is a very long interval, in the course of which many

When it has got to this height, it cannot well go higher. If it did,
more land would soon be turned to this purpose. In several prov-

other sorts of rude produce gradually arrive at their highest price,
some sooner and some later, according to different circumstances.

inces of France, the feeding of poultry is considered as a very important article in rural economy, and sufficiently profitable to en-

Thus, in every farm, the offals of the barn and stable will maintain a certain number of poultry. These, as they are fed with what

courage the farmer to raise a considerable quantity of Indian corn
and buckwheat for this purpose. A middling farmer will there

would otherwise be lost, are a mere save-all; and as they cost the

sometimes have four hundred fowls in his yard. The feeding of

190

Adam Smith
poultry seems scarce yet to be generally considered as a matter of
so much importance in England. They are certainly, however, dearer

fully sufficient to supply the demand, this sort of butcher’s meat
comes to market at a much lower price than any other. But when

in England than in France, as England receives considerable supplies from France. In the progress of improvements, the period at

the demand rises beyond what this quantity can supply, when it
becomes necessary to raise food on purpose for feeding and fat-

which every particular sort of animal food is dearest, must naturally be that which immediately precedes the general practice of

tening hogs, in the same manner as for feeding and fattening other
cattle, the price necessarily rises, and becomes proportionably ei-

cultivating land for the sake of raising it. For some time before
this practice becomes general, the scarcity must necessarily raise

ther higher or lower than that of other butcher’s meat, according
as the nature of the country, and the state of its agriculture, hap-

the price. After it has become general, new methods of feeding are
commonly fallen upon, which enable the farmer to raise upon the

pen to render the feeding of hogs more or less expensive than that
of other cattle. In France, according to Mr Buffon, the price of

same quantity of ground a much greater quantity of that particular sort of animal food. The plenty not only obliges him to sell

pork is nearly equal to that of beef. In most parts of Great Britain
it is at present somewhat higher.

cheaper, but, in consequence of these improvements, he can afford to sell cheaper; for if he could not afford it, the plenty would

The great rise in the price both of hogs and poultry, has, in
Great Britain, been frequently imputed to the diminution of the

not be of long continuance. It has been probably in this manner
that the introduction of clover, turnips, carrots, cabbages, etc. has

number of cottagers and other small occupiers of land; an event
which has in every part of Europe been the immediate forerunner

contributed to sink the common price of butcher’s meat in the
London market, somewhat below what it was about the begin-

of improvement and better cultivation, but which at the same
time may have contributed to raise the price of those articles, both

ning of the last century.
The hog, that finds his food among ordure, and greedily de-

somewhat sooner and somewhat faster than it would otherwise
have risen. As the poorest family can often maintain a cat or a dog

vours many things rejected by every other useful animal, is, like
poultry, originally kept as a save-all. As long as the number of

without any expense, so the poorest occupiers of land can commonly maintain a few poultry, or a sow and a few pigs, at very

such animals, which can thus be reared at little or no expense, is

little. The little offals of their own table, their whey, skimmed

191

The Wealth of Nations
milk, and butter milk, supply those animals with a part of their
food, and they find the rest in the neighbouring fields, without

of it for several years. Part of all these is reserved for the use of his
own family; the rest goes to market, in order to find the best price

doing any sensible damage to any body. By diminishing the number of those small occupiers, therefore, the quantity of this sort of

which is to be had, and which can scarce be so low is to discourage
him from sending thither whatever is over and above the use of his

provisions, which is thus produced at little or no expense, must
certainly have been a good deal diminished, and their price must

own family. If it is very low indeed, he will be likely to manage his
dairy in a very slovenly and dirty manner, and will scarce, per-

consequently have been raised both sooner and faster than it would
otherwise have risen. Sooner or later, however, in the progress of

haps, think it worth while to have a particular room or building
on purpose for it, but will suffer the business to be carried on

improvement, it must at any rate have risen to the utmost height
to which it is capable of rising; or to the price which pays the

amidst the smoke, filth, and nastiness of his own kitchen, as was
the case of almost all the farmers’ dairies in Scotland thirty or

labour and expense of cultivating the land which furnishes them
with food, as well as these are paid upon the greater part of other

forty years ago, and as is the case of many of them still. The same
causes which gradually raise the price of butcher’s meat, the in-

cultivated land.
The business of the dairy, like the feeding of hogs and poultry,

crease of the demand, and, in consequence of the improvement of
the country, the diminution of the quantity which can be fed at

is originally carried on as a save-all. The cattle necessarily kept
upon the farm produce more milk than either the rearing of their

little or no expense, raise, in the same manner, that of the produce
of the dairy, of which the price naturally connects with that of

own young, or the consumption of the farmer’s family requires;
and they produce most at one particular season. But of all the

butcher’s meat, or with the expense of feeding cattle. The increase
of price pays for more labour, care, and cleanliness. The dairy

productions of land, milk is perhaps the most perishable. In the
warm season, when it is most abundant, it will scarce keep four-

becomes more worthy of the farmer’s attention, and the quality of
its produce gradually improves. The price at last gets so high, that

and-twenty hours. The farmer, by making it into fresh butter, stores
a small part of it for a week; by making it into salt butter, for a

it becomes worth while to employ some of the most fertile and
best cultivated lands in feeding cattle merely for the purpose of

year; and by making it into cheese, he stores a much greater part

the dairy; and when it has got to this height, it cannot well go

192

Adam Smith
higher. If it did, more land would soon be turned to this purpose.
It seems to have got to this height through the greater part of

The lands of no country, it is evident, can ever be completely
cultivated and improved, till once the price of every produce, which

England, where much good land is commonly employed in this
manner. If you except the neighbourhood of a few considerable

human industry is obliged to raise upon them, has got so high as
to pay for the expense of complete improvement and cultivation.

towns, it seems not yet to have got to this height anywhere in
Scotland, where common farmers seldom employ much good land

In order to do this, the price of each particular produce must be
sufficient, first, to pay the rent of good corn land, as it is that

in raising food for cattle, merely for the purpose of the dairy. The
price of the produce, though it has risen very considerably within

which regulates the rent of the greater part of other cultivated
land; and, secondly, to pay the labour and expense of the farmer,

these few years, is probably still too low to admit of it. The inferiority of the quality, indeed, compared with that of the produce of

as well as they are commonly paid upon good corn land; or, in
other words, to replace with the ordinary profits the stock which

English dairies, is fully equal to that of the price. But this inferiority of quality is, perhaps, rather the effect of this lowness of price,

he employs about it. This rise in the price of each particular produce; must evidently be previous to the improvement and cultiva-

than the cause of it. Though the quality was much better, the
greater part of what is brought to market could not, I apprehend,

tion of the land which is destined for raising it. Gain is the end of
all improvement; and nothing could deserve that name, of which

in the present circumstances of the country, be disposed of at a
much better price; and the present price, it is probable, would not

loss was to be the necessary consequence. But loss must be the
necessary consequence of improving land for the sake of a pro-

pay the expense of the land and labour necessary for producing a
much better quality. Through the greater part of England, not-

duce of which the price could never bring back the expense. If the
complete improvement and cultivation of the country be, as it

withstanding the superiority of price, the dairy is not reckoned a
more profitable employment of land than the raising of corn, or

most certainly is, the greatest of all public advantages, this rise in
the price of all those different sorts of rude produce, instead of

the fattening of cattle, the two great objects of agriculture. Through
the greater part of Scotland, therefore, it cannot yet be even so

being considered as a public calamity, ought to be regarded as the
necessary forerunner and attendant of the greatest of all public

profitable.

advantages.

193

The Wealth of Nations
This rise, too, in the nominal or money price of all those different sorts of rude produce, has been the effect, not of any degrada-

that of the other. The quantity of wool or of raw hides, for example, which any country can afford, is necessarily limited by the

tion in the value of silver, but of a rise in their real price. They
have become worth, not only a greater quantity of silver, but a

number of great and small cattle that are kept in it. The state of its
improvement, and the nature of its agriculture, again necessarily

greater quantity of labour and subsistence than before. As it costs
a greater quantity of labour and subsistence to bring them to mar-

determine this number.
The same causes which, in the progress of improvement, gradu-

ket, so, when they are brought thither they represent, or are equivalent to a greater quantity.

ally raise the price of butcher’s meat, should have the same effect,
it may be thought, upon the prices of wool and raw hides, and

Third Sort. — The third and last sort of rude produce, of which
the price naturally rises in the progress of improvement, is that in
which the efficacy of human industry, in augmenting the quan-

raise them, too, nearly in the same proportion. It probably would
be so, if, in the rude beginnings of improvement, the market for
the latter commodities was confined within as narrow bounds as
that for the former. But the extent of their respective markets is

tity, is either limited or uncertain. Though the real price of this
sort of rude produce, therefore, naturally tends to rise in the

commonly extremely different.
The market for butcher’s meat is almost everywhere confined to

progress of improvement, yet, according as different accidents
happen to render the efforts of human industry more or less suc-

the country which produces it. Ireland, and some part of British
America, indeed, carry on a considerable trade in salt provisions;

cessful in augmenting the quantity, it may happen sometimes even
to fall, sometimes to continue the same, in very different periods

but they are, I believe, the only countries in the commercial world
which do so, or which export to other countries any considerable

of improvement, and sometimes to rise more or less in the same
period.

part of their butcher’s meat.
The market for wool and raw hides, on the contrary, is, in the

There are some sorts of rude produce which nature has rendered a kind of appendages to other sorts; so that the quantity of

rude beginnings of improvement, very seldom confined to the
country which produces them. They can easily be transported to

the one which any country can afford, is necessarily limited by

distant countries; wool without any preparation, and raw hides

194

Adam Smith
with very little; and as they are the materials of many manufactures, the industry of other countries may occasion a demand for

cattle of the Spaniards, who still continue to possess, not only the
eastern part of the coast, but the whole inland mountainous part

them, though that of the country which produces them might
not occasion any.

of the country.
Though, in the progress of improvement and population, the

In countries ill cultivated, and therefore but thinly inhabited,
the price of the wool and the hide bears always a much greater

price of the whole beast necessarily rises, yet the price of the carcase is likely to be much more affected by this rise than that of the

proportion to that of the whole beast, than in countries where,
improvement and population being further advanced, there is more

wool and the hide. The market for the carcase being in the rude
state of society confined always to the country which produces it,

demand for butcher’s meat. Mr Hume observes, that in the Saxon
times, the fleece was estimated at two-fifths of the value of the

must necessarily be extended in proportion to the improvement
and population of that country. But the market for the wool and

whole sheep and that this was much above the proportion of its
present estimation. In some provinces of Spain, I have been as-

the hides, even of a barbarous country, often extending to the
whole commercial world, it can very seldom be enlarged in the

sured, the sheep is frequently killed merely for the sake of the
fleece and the tallow. The carcase is often left to rot upon the

same proportion. The state of the whole commercial world can
seldom be much affected by the improvement of any particular

ground, or to be devoured by beasts and birds of prey. If this sometimes happens even in Spain, it happens almost constantly in Chili,

country; and the market for such commodities may remain the
same, or very nearly the same, after such improvements, as before.

at Buenos Ayres, and in many other parts of Spanish America,
where the horned cattle are almost constantly killed merely for the

It should, however, in the natural course of things, rather, upon
the whole, be somewhat extended in consequence of them. If the

sake of the hide and the tallow. This, too, used to happen almost
constantly in Hispaniola, while it was infested by the buccaneers,

manufactures, especially, of which those commodities are the
materials, should ever come to flourish in the country, the mar-

and before the settlement, improvement, and populousness of the
French plantations ( which now extend round the coast of almost

ket, though it might not be much enlarged, would at least be
brought much nearer to the place of growth than before; and the

the whole western half of the island) had given some value to the

price of those materials might at least be increased by what had

195

The Wealth of Nations
usually been the expense of transporting them to distant countries. Though it might not rise, therefore, in the same proportion

only. The proportion between the real price of ancient and modern times, therefore, is as twelve to six, or as two to one. In those

as that of butcher’s meat, it ought naturally to rise somewhat, and
it ought certainly not to fall.

ancient times, a tod of wool would have purchased twice the quantity of subsistence which it will purchase at present, and conse-

In England, however, notwithstanding the flourishing state of
its woollen manufacture, the price of English wool has fallen very

quently twice the quantity of labour, if the real recompence of
labour had been the same in both periods.

considerably since the time of Edward III. There are many authentic records which demonstrate that, during the reign of that

This degradation, both in the real and nominal value of wool,
could never have happened in consequence of the natural course

prince (towards the middle of the fourteenth century, or about
1339), what was reckoned the moderate and reasonable price of

of things. It has accordingly been the effect of violence and artifice. First, of the absolute prohibition of exporting wool from

the tod, or twenty-eight pounds of English wool, was not less
than ten shillings of the money of those times {See Smith’s Mem-

England: secondly, of the permission of importing it from Spain,
duty free: thirdly, of the prohibition of exporting it from Ireland

oirs of Wool, vol. i c. 5, 6, 7. also vol. ii.}, containing, at the rate of
twenty-pence the ounce, six ounces of silver, Tower weight, equal

to another country but England. In consequence of these regulations, the market for English wool, instead of being somewhat

to about thirty shillings of our present money. In the present times,
one-and-twenty shillings the tod may be reckoned a good price

extended, in consequence of the improvement of England, has
been confined to the home market, where the wool of several other

for very good English wool. The money price of wool, therefore,
in the time of Edward III. was to its money price in the present

countries is allowed to come into competition with it, and where
that of Ireland is forced into competition with it. As the woollen

times as ten to seven. The superiority of its real price was still
greater. At the rate of six shillings and eightpence the quarter, ten

manufactures, too, of Ireland, are fully as much discouraged as is
consistent with justice and fair dealing, the Irish can work up but

shillings was in those ancient times the price of twelve bushels of
wheat. At the rate of twenty-eight shillings the quarter, one-and-

a smaller part of their own wool at home, and are therefore obliged
to send a greater proportion of it to Great Britain, the only market

twenty shillings is in the present times the price of six bushels

they are allowed.

196

Adam Smith
I have not been able to find any such authentic records concerning the price of raw hides in ancient times. Wool was commonly

we cannot suppose that they were of a very large size. An ox hide
which weighs four stone of sixteen pounds of avoirdupois, is not

paid as a subsidy to the king, and its valuation in that subsidy
ascertains, at least in some degree, what was its ordinary price. But

in the present times reckoned a bad one; and in those ancient
times would probably have been reckoned a very good one. But at

this seems not to have been the case with raw hides. Fleetwood,
however, from an account in 1425, between the prior of Burcester

half-a-crown the stone, which at this moment (February 1773) I
understand to be the common price, such a hide would at present

Oxford and one of his canons, gives us their price, at least as it was
stated upon that particular occasion, viz. five ox hides at twelve

cost only ten shillings. Through its nominal price, therefore, is
higher in the present than it was in those ancient times, its real

shillings; five cow hides at seven shillings and threepence; thirtysix
sheep skins of two years old at nine shillings; sixteen calf skins at

price, the real quantity of subsistence which it will purchase or
command, is rather somewhat lower. The price of cow hides, as

two shillings. In 1425, twelve shillings contained about the same
quantity of silver as four-and-twenty shillings of our present money.

stated in the above account, is nearly in the common proportion
to that of ox hides. That of sheep skins is a good deal above it.

An ox hide, therefore, was in this account valued at the same quantity of silver as 4s. 4/5ths of our present money. Its nominal price

They had probably been sold with the wool. That of calves skins,
on the contrary, is greatly below it. In countries where the price of

was a good deal lower than at present. But at the rate of six shillings and eightpence the quarter, twelve shillings would in those

cattle is very low, the calves, which are not intended to be reared
in order to keep up the stock, are generally killed very young, as

times have purchased fourteen bushels and four-fifths of a bushel
of wheat, which, at three and sixpence the bushel, would in the

was the case in Scotland twenty or thirty years ago. It saves the
milk, which their price would not pay for. Their skins, therefore,

present times cost 51s. 4d. An ox hide, therefore, would in those
times have purchased as much corn as ten shillings and threepence

are commonly good for little.
The price of raw hides is a good deal lower at present than it was

would purchase at present. Its real value was equal to ten shillings
and threepence of our present money. In those ancient times, when

a few years ago; owing probably to the taking off the duty upon
seal skins, and to the allowing, for a limited time, the importation

the cattle were half starved during the greater part of the winter,

of raw hides from Ireland, and from the plantations, duty free,

197

The Wealth of Nations
which was done in 1769. Take the whole of the present century at
an average, their real price has probably been somewhat higher

of its surplus hides, or of those which are not manufactured at
home. The hides of common cattle have, but within these few

than it was in those ancient times. The nature of the commodity
renders it not quite so proper for being transported to distant

years, been put among the enumerated commodities which the
plantations can send nowhere but to the mother country; neither

markets as wool. It suffers more by keeping. A salted hide is reckoned inferior to a fresh one, and sells for a lower price. This cir-

has the commerce of Ireland been in this case oppressed hitherto,
in order to support the manufactures of Great Britain.

cumstance must necessarily have some tendency to sink the price
of raw hides produced in a country which does not manufacture

Whatever regulations tend to sink the price, either of wool or of
raw hides, below what it naturally would he, must, in an improved

them, but is obliged to export them, and comparatively to raise
that of those produced in a country which does manufacture them.

and cultivated country, have some tendency to raise the price of
butcher’s meat. The price both of the great and small cattle, which

It must have some tendency to sink their price in a barbarous, and
to raise it in an improved and manufacturing country. It must

are fed on improved and cultivated land, must be sufficient to pay
the rent which the landlord, and the profit which the farmer, has

have had some tendency, therefore, to sink it in ancient, and to
raise it in modern times. Our tanners, besides, have not been quite

reason to expect from improved and cultivated land. If it is not,
they will soon cease to feed them. Whatever part of this price,

so successful as our clothiers, in convincing the wisdom of the
nation, that the safety of the commonwealth depends upon the

therefore, is not paid by the wool and the hide, must be paid by
the carcase. The less there is paid for the one, the more must be

prosperity of their particular manufacture. They have accordingly
been much less favoured. The exportation of raw hides has, in-

paid for the other. In what manner this price is to be divided upon
the different parts of the beast, is indifferent to the landlords and

deed, been prohibited, and declared a nuisance; but their importation from foreign countries has been subjected to a duty; and

farmers, provided it is all paid to them. In an improved and cultivated country, therefore, their interest as landlords and farmers

though this duty has been taken off from those of Ireland and the
plantations (for the limited time of five years only), yet Ireland

cannot be much affected by such regulations, though their interest as consumers may, by the rise in the price of provisions. It

has not been confined to the market of Great Britain for the sale

would be quite otherwise, however, in an unimproved and uncul-

198

Adam Smith
tivated country, where the greater part of the lands could be applied to no other purpose but the feeding of cattle, and where the

The wool of Scotland fell very considerably in its price in consequence of the union with England, by which it was excluded from

wool and the hide made the principal part of the value of those
cattle. Their interest as landlords and farmers would in this case

the great market of Europe, and confined to the narrow one of
Great Britain. The value of the greater part of the lands in the

be very deeply affected by such regulations, and their interest as
consumers very little. The fall in the price of the wool and the

southern counties of Scotland, which are chiefly a sheep country,
would have been very deeply affected by this event, had not the

hide would not in this case raise the price of the carcase; because
the greater part of the lands of the country being applicable to no

rise in the price of butcher’s meat fully compensated the fall in the
price of wool.

other purpose but the feeding of cattle, the same number would
still continue to be fed. The same quantity of butcher’s meat would

As the efficacy of human industry, in increasing the quantity
either of wool or of raw hides, is limited, so far as it depends upon

still come to market. The demand for it would be no greater than
before. Its price, therefore, would be the same as before. The whole

the produce of the country where it is exerted; so it is uncertain so
far as it depends upon the produce of other countries. It so far

price of cattle would fall, and along with it both the rent and the
profit of all those lands of which cattle was the principal produce,

depends not so much upon the quantity which they produce, as
upon that which they do not manufacture; and upon the restraints

that is, of the greater part of the lands of the country. The perpetual prohibition of the exportation of wool, which is commonly,

which they may or may not think proper to impose upon the
exportation of this sort of rude produce. These circumstances, as

but very falsely, ascribed to Edward III., would, in the then circumstances of the country, have been the most destructive regula-

they are altogether independent of domestic industry, so they necessarily render the efficacy of its efforts more or less uncertain. In

tion which could well have been thought of. It would not only
have reduced the actual value of the greater part of the lands in the

multiplying this sort of rude produce, therefore, the efficacy of
human industry is not only limited, but uncertain.

kingdom, but by reducing the price of the most important species
of small cattle, it would have retarded very much its subsequent

In multiplying another very important sort of rude produce,
the quantity of fish that is brought to market, it is likewise both

improvement.

limited and uncertain. It is limited by the local situation of the

199

The Wealth of Nations
country, by the proximity or distance of its different provinces
from the sea, by the number of its lakes and rivers, and by what

posed, the general efficacy of industry in bringing a certain quantity of fish to market, taking the course of a year, or of several years

may be called the fertility or barrenness of those seas, lakes, and
rivers, as to this sort of rude produce. As population increases, as

together, it may, perhaps, be thought is certain enough; and it, no
doubt, is so. As it depends more, however, upon the local situation

the annual produce of the land and labour of the country grows
greater and greater, there come to be more buyers of fish; and

of the country, than upon the state of its wealth and industry; as
upon this account it may in different countries be the same in very

those buyers, too, have a greater quantity and variety of other
goods, or, what is the same thing, the price of a greater quantity

different periods of improvement, and very different in the same
period; its connection with the state of improvement is uncertain;

and variety of other goods, to buy with. But it will generally be
impossible to supply the great and extended market, without em-

and it is of this sort of uncertainty that I am here speaking.
In increasing the quantity of the different minerals and metals

ploying a quantity of labour greater than in proportion to what
had been requisite for supplying the narrow and confined one. A

which are drawn from the bowels of the earth, that of the more
precious ones particularly, the efficacy of human industry seems

market which, from requiring only one thousand, comes to require annually ten thousand ton of fish, can seldom be supplied,

not to be limited, but to be altogether uncertain.
The quantity of the precious metals which is to be found in any

without employing more than ten times the quantity of labour
which had before been sufficient to supply it. The fish must gen-

country, is not limited by any thing in its local situation, such as
the fertility or barrenness of its own mines. Those metals frequently

erally be sought for at a greater distance, larger vessels must be
employed, and more expensive machinery of every kind made use

abound in countries which possess no mines. Their quantity, in
every particular country, seems to depend upon two different cir-

of. The real price of this commodity, therefore, naturally rises in
the progress of improvement. It has accordingly done so, I be-

cumstances; first, upon its power of purchasing, upon the state of
its industry, upon the annual produce of its land and labour, in

lieve, more or less in every country.
Though the success of a particular day’s fishing maybe a very

consequence of which it can afford to employ a greater or a smaller
quantity of labour and subsistence, in bringing or purchasing such

uncertain matter, yet the local situation of the country being sup-

superfluities as gold and silver, either from its own mines, or from

200

Adam Smith
those of other countries; and, secondly, upon the fertility or barrenness of the mines which may happen at any particular time to

proportion to the fertility, and rise in proportion to the barrenness of those mines.

supply the commercial world with those metals. The quantity of
those metals in the countries most remote from the mines, must

The fertility or barrenness of the mines, however, which may
happen at any particular time to supply the commercial world, is

be more or less affected by this fertility or barrenness, on account
of the easy and cheap transportation of those metals, of their small

a circumstance which, it is evident, may have no sort of connection with the state of industry in a particular country. It seems

bulk and great value. Their quantity in China and Indostan must
have been more or less affected by the abundance of the mines of

even to have no very necessary connection with that of the world
in general. As arts and commerce, indeed, gradually spread them-

America.
So far as their quantity in any particular country depends upon

selves over a greater and a greater part of the earth, the search for
new mines, being extended over a wider surface, may have some-

the former of those two circumstances (the power of purchasing),
their real price, like that of all other luxuries and superfluities, is

what a better chance for being successful than when confined within
narrower bounds. The discovery of new mines, however, as the

likely to rise with the wealth and improvement of the country,
and to fall with its poverty and depression. Countries which have

old ones come to be gradually exhausted, is a matter of the greatest uncertainty, and such as no human skill or industry can insure.

a great quantity of labour and subsistence to spare, can afford to
purchase any particular quantity of those metals at the expense of

All indications, it is acknowledged, are doubtful; and the actual
discovery and successful working of a new mine can alone ascer-

a greater quantity of labour and subsistence, than countries which
have less to spare.

tain the reality of its value, or even of its existence. In this search
there seem to be no certain limits, either to the possible success, or

So far as their quantity in any particular country depends upon
the latter of those two circumstances (the fertility or barrenness of

to the possible disappointment of human industry. In the course
of a century or two, it is possible that new mines may be discov-

the mines which happen to supply the commercial world), their
real price, the real quantity of labour and subsistence which they

ered, more fertile than any that have ever yet been known; and it is
just equally possible, that the most fertile mine then known may

will purchase or exchange for, will, no doubt, sink more or less in

be more barren than any that was wrought before the discovery of

201

The Wealth of Nations
the mines of America. Whether the one or the other of those two
events may happen to take place, is of very little importance to the

money price of corn, and of goods in general, or, in other words,
the high value of gold and silver, as a proof, not only of the scar-

real wealth and prosperity of the world, to the real value of the
annual produce of the land and labour of mankind. Its nominal

city of those metals, but of the poverty and barbarism of the country at the time when it took place. This notion is connected with

value, the quantity of gold and silver by which this annual produce could be expressed or represented, would, no doubt, be very

the system of political economy, which represents national wealth
as consisting in the abundance and national poverty in the scar-

different; but its real value, the real quantity of labour which it
could purchase or command, would be precisely the same. A shil-

city, of gold and silver; a system which I shall endeavour to explain and examine at great length in the fourth book of this In-

ling might, in the one case, represent no more labour than a penny
does at present; and a penny, in the other, might represent as much

quiry. I shall only observe at present, that the high value of the
precious metals can be no proof of the poverty or barbarism of

as a shilling does now. But in the one case, he who had a shilling in
his pocket would be no richer than he who has a penny at present;

any particular country at the time when it took place. It is a proof
only of the barrenness of the mines which happened at that time

and in the other, he who had a penny would be just as rich as he
who has a shilling now. The cheapness and abundance of gold and

to supply the commercial world. A poor country, as it cannot afford to buy more, so it can as little afford to pay dearer for gold

silver plate would be the sole advantage which the world could
derive from the one event; and the dearness and scarcity of those

and silver than a rich one; and the value of those metals, therefore,
is not likely to be higher in the former than in the latter. In China,

trifling superfluities, the only inconveniency it could suffer from
the other.

a country much richer than any part of Europe, the value of the
precious metals is much higher than in any part of Europe. As the

Conclusion of the Digression concerning the Variations in the

wealth of Europe, indeed, has increased greatly since the discovery
of the mines of America, so the value of gold and silver has gradu-

Value of Silver.
The greater part of the writers who have collected the money

ally diminished. This diminution of their value, however, has not
been owing to the increase of the real wealth of Europe, of the

price of things in ancient times, seem to have considered the low

annual produce of its land and labour, but to the accidental dis-

202

Adam Smith
covery of more abundant mines than any that were known before.
The increase of the quantity of gold and silver in Europe, and the

in Europe. The value of the precious metals, however, must be
lower in Spain and Portugal than in any other part of Europe, as

increase of its manufactures and agriculture, are two events which,
though they have happened nearly about the same time, yet have

they come from those countries to all other parts of Europe, loaded,
not only with a freight and an insurance, but with the expense of

arisen from very different causes, and have scarce any natural connection with one another. The one has arisen from a mere acci-

smuggling, their exportation being either prohibited or subjected
to a duty. In proportion to the annual produce of the land and

dent, in which neither prudence nor policy either had or could
have any share; the other, from the fall of the feudal system, and

labour, therefore, their quantity must be greater in those countries
than in any other part of Europe; those countries, however, are

from the establishment of a government which afforded to industry the only encouragement which it requires, some tolerable se-

poorer than the greater part of Europe. Though the feudal system
has been abolished in Spain and Portugal, it has not been suc-

curity that it shall enjoy the fruits of its own labour. Poland, where
the feudal system still continues to take place, is at this day as

ceeded by a much better.
As the low value of gold and silver, therefore, is no proof of the

beggarly a country as it was before the discovery of America. The
money price of corn, however, has risen; the real value of the pre-

wealth and flourishing state of the country where it takes place; so
neither is their high value, or the low money price either of goods

cious metals has fallen in Poland, in the same manner as in other
parts of Europe. Their quantity, therefore, must have increased

in general, or of corn in particular, any proof of its poverty and
barbarism.

there as in other places, and nearly in the same proportion to the
annual produce of its land and labour. This increase of the quan-

But though the low money price, either of goods in general, or
of corn in particular, be no proof of the poverty or barbarism of

tity of those metals, however, has not, it seems, increased that
annual produce, has neither improved the manufactures and agri-

the times, the low money price of some particular sorts of goods,
such as cattle, poultry, game of all kinds, etc. in proportion to that

culture of the country, nor mended the circumstances of its inhabitants. Spain and Portugal, the countries which possess the

of corn, is a most decisive one. It clearly demonstrates, first, their
great abundance in proportion to that of corn, and, consequently,

mines, are, after Poland, perhaps the two most beggarly countries

the great extent of the land which they occupied in proportion to

203

The Wealth of Nations
what was occupied by corn; and, secondly, the low value of this
land in proportion to that of corn land, and, consequently, the

much reasoning and conversation, does not affect all sorts of provisions equally. Taking the course of the present century at an

uncultivated and unimproved state of the far greater part of the
lands of the country. It clearly demonstrates, that the stock and

average, the price of corn, it is acknowledged, even by those who
account for this rise by the degradation of the value of silver, has

population of the country did not bear the same proportion to
the extent of its territory, which they commonly do in civilized

risen much less than that of some other sorts of provisions. The
rise in the price of those other sorts of provisions, therefore, can-

countries; and that society was at that time, and in that country,
but in its infancy. From the high or low money price, either of

not be owing altogether to the degradation of the value of silver.
Some other causes must be taken into the account; and those which

goods in general, or of corn in particular, we can infer only, that
the mines, which at that time happened to supply the commercial

have been above assigned, will, perhaps, without having recourse
to the supposed degradation of the value of silver, sufficiently ex-

world with gold and silver, were fertile or barren, not that the
country was rich or poor. But from the high or low money price

plain this rise in those particular sorts of provisions, of which the
price has actually risen in proportion to that of corn.

of some sorts of goods in proportion to that of others, we can
infer, with a degree of probability that approaches almost to cer-

As to the price of corn itself, it has, during the sixty-four first
years of the present century, and before the late extraordinary course

tainty, that it was rich or poor, that the greater part of its lands
were improved or unimproved, and that it was either in a more or

of bad seasons, been somewhat lower than it was during the sixtyfour last years of the preceding century. This fact is attested, not

less barbarous state, or in a more or less civilized one.
Any rise in the money price of goods which proceeded alto-

only by the accounts of Windsor market, but by the public fiars of
all the different counties of Scotland, and by the accounts of sev-

gether from the degradation of the value of silver, would affect all
sorts of goods equally, and raise their price universally, a third, or

eral different markets in France, which have been collected with
great diligence and fidelity by Mr Messance, and by Mr Dupré de

a fourth, or a fifth part higher, according as silver happened to
lose a third, or a fourth, or a fifth part of its former value. But the

St Maur. The evidence is more complete than could well have
been expected in a matter which is naturally so very difficult to be

rise in the price of provisions, which has been the subject of so

ascertained.

204

Adam Smith
As to the high price of corn during these last ten or twelve years,
it can be sufficiently accounted for from the badness of the sea-

wealth of the country, the annual produce of its land and labour,
may, notwithstanding this circumstance, be either gradually de-

sons, without supposing any degradation in the value of silver.
The opinion, therefore, that silver is continually sinking in its

clining, as in Portugal and Poland; or gradually advancing, as in
most other parts of Europe. But if this rise in the price of some

value, seems not to be founded upon any good observations, either upon the prices of corn, or upon those of other provisions.

sorts of provisions be owing to a rise in the real value of the land
which produces them, to its increased fertility, or, in consequence

The same quantity of silver, it may perhaps be said, will, in the
present times, even according to the account which has been here

of more extended improvement and good cultivation, to its having been rendered fit for producing corn; it is owing to a circum-

given, purchase a much smaller quantity of several sorts of provisions than it would have done during some part of the last cen-

stance which indicates, in the clearest manner, the prosperous and
advancing state of the country. The land constitutes by far the

tury; and to ascertain whether this change be owing to a rise in the
value of those goods, or to a fall in the value of silver, is only to

greatest, the most important, and the most durable part of the
wealth of every extensive country. It may surely be of some use, or,

establish a vain and useless distinction, which can be of no sort of
service to the man who has only a certain quantity of silver to go

at least, it may give some satisfaction to the public, to have so
decisive a proof of the increasing value of by far the greatest, the

to market with, or a certain fixed revenue in money. I certainly do
not pretend that the knowledge of this distinction will enable him

most important, and the most durable part of its wealth.
It may, too, be of some use to the public, in regulating the pecu-

to buy cheaper. It may not, however, upon that account be altogether useless.

niary reward of some of its inferior servants. If this rise in the price
of some sorts of provisions be owing to a fall in the value of silver,

It may be of some use to the public, by affording an easy proof
of the prosperous condition of the country. If the rise in the price

their pecuniary reward, provided it was not too large before, ought
certainly to be augmented in proportion to the extent of this fall.

of some sorts of provisions be owing altogether to a fall in the
value of silver, it is owing to a circumstance, from which nothing

If it is not augmented, their real recompence will evidently be so
much diminished. But if this rise of price is owing to the increased

can be inferred but the fertility of the American mines. The real

value, in consequence of the improved fertility of the land which

205

The Wealth of Nations
produces such provisions, it becomes a much nicer matter to judge,
either in what proportion any pecuniary reward ought to be aug-

sarily rises, that of another as necessarily falls; and it becomes a
matter of more nicety to judge how far the rise in the one may be

mented, or whether it ought to be augmented at all. The extension of improvement and cultivation, as it necessarily raises more

compensated by the fall in the other. When the real price of
butcher’s meat has once got to its height (which, with regard to

or less, in proportion to the price of corn, that of every sort of
animal food, so it as necessarily lowers that of, I believe, every sort

every sort, except perhaps that of hogs flesh, it seems to have done
through a great part of England more than a century ago), any rise

of vegetable food. It raises the price of animal food; because a
great part of the land which produces it, being rendered fit for

which can afterwards happen in that of any other sort of animal
food, cannot much affect the circumstances of the inferior ranks

producing corn, must afford to the landlord anti farmer the rent
and profit of corn land. It lowers the price of vegetable food; be-

of people. The circumstances of the poor, through a great part of
England, cannot surely be so much distressed by any rise in the

cause, by increasing the fertility of the land, it increases its abundance. The improvements of agriculture, too, introduce many sorts

price of poultry, fish, wild-fowl, or venison, as they must be relieved by the fall in that of potatoes.

of vegetable food, which requiring less land, and not more labour
than corn, come much cheaper to market. Such are potatoes and

In the present season of scarcity, the high price of corn no doubt
distresses the poor. But in times of moderate plenty, when corn is

maize, or what is called Indian corn, the two most important improvements which the agriculture of Europe, perhaps, which Eu-

at its ordinary or average price, the natural rise in the price of any
other sort of rude produce cannot much affect them. They suffer

rope itself, has received from the great extension of its commerce
and navigation. Many sorts of vegetable food, besides, which in

more, perhaps, by the artificial rise which has been occasioned by
taxes in the price of some manufactured commodities, as of salt,

the rude state of agriculture are confined to the kitchen-garden,
and raised only by the spade, come, in its improved state, to be

soap, leather, candles, malt, beer, ale, etc.

introduced into common fields, and to be raised by the plough;
such as turnips, carrots, cabbages, etc. If, in the progress of improvement, therefore, the real price of one species of food neces-

206

Adam Smith
Effects of the Progress of Improvement upon the real Price of
Manufactures.

But in all cases in which the real price of the rude material either
does not rise at all, or does not rise very much, that of the manu-

It is the natural effect of improvement, however, to diminish
gradually the real price of almost all manufactures. That of the

factured commodity sinks very considerably.
This diminution of price has, in the course of the present and

manufacturing workmanship diminishes, perhaps, in all of them
without exception. In consequence of better machinery, of greater

preceding century, been most remarkable in those manufactures
of which the materials are the coarser metals. A better movement

dexterity, and of a more proper division and distribution of work,
all of which are the natural effects of improvement, a much smaller

of a watch, than about the middle of the last century could have
been bought for twenty pounds, may now perhaps be had for

quantity of labour becomes requisite for executing any particular
piece of work; and though, in consequence of the flourishing cir-

twenty shillings. In the work of cutlers and locksmiths, in all the
toys which are made of the coarser metals, and in all those goods

cumstances of the society, the real price of labour should rise very
considerably, yet the great diminution of the quantity will gener-

which are commonly known by the name of Birmingham and
Sheffield ware, there has been, during the same period, a very great

ally much more than compensate the greatest rise which can happen in the price.

reduction of price, though not altogether so great as in watchwork. It has, however, been sufficient to astonish the workmen of

There are, indeed, a few manufactures, in which the necessary
rise in the real price of the rude materials will more than compen-

every other part of Europe, who in many cases acknowledge that
they can produce no work of equal goodness for double or even

sate all the advantages which improvement can introduce into the
execution of the work In carpenters’ and joiners’ work, and in the

for triple the price. There are perhaps no manufactures, in which
the division of labour can be carried further, or in which the ma-

coarser sort of cabinet work, the necessary rise in the real price of
barren timber, in consequence of the improvement of land, will

chinery employed admits of ’ a greater variety of improvements,
than those of which the materials are the coarser metals.

more than compensate all the advantages which can be derived
from the best machinery, the greatest dexterity, and the most proper

In the clothing manufacture there has, during the same period,
been no such sensible reduction of price. The price of superfine

division and distribution of work.

cloth, I have been assured, on the contrary, has, within these five-

207

The Wealth of Nations
and-twenty or thirty years, risen somewhat in proportion to its
quality, owing, it was said, to a considerable rise in the price of the

as four-and-twenty shillings of our present money, was, at that
time, reckoned not an unreasonable price for a yard of the finest

material, which consists altogether of Spanish wool. That of the
Yorkshire cloth, which is made altogether of English wool, is said,

cloth; and as this is a sumptuary law, such cloth, it is probable,
had usually been sold somewhat dearer. A guinea may be reck-

indeed, during the course of the present century, to have fallen a
good deal in proportion to its quality. Quality, however, is so very

oned the highest price in the present times. Even though the quality of the cloths, therefore, should be supposed equal, and that of

disputable a matter, that I look upon all information of this kind
as somewhat uncertain. In the clothing manufacture, the division

the present times is most probably much superior, yet, even upon
this supposition, the money price of the finest cloth appears to

of labour is nearly the same now as it was a century ago, and the
machinery employed is not very different. There may, however,

have been considerably reduced since the end of the fifteenth century. But its real price has been much more reduced. Six shillings

have been some small improvements in both, which may have
occasioned some reduction of price.

and eightpence was then, and long afterwards, reckoned the average price of a quarter of wheat. Sixteen shillings, therefore, was

But the reduction will appear much more sensible and undeniable, if we compare the price of this manufacture in the present

the price of two quarters and more than three bushels of wheat.
Valuing a quarter of wheat in the present times at eight-and-twenty

times with what it was in a much remoter period, towards the end
of the fifteenth century, when the labour was probably much less

shillings, the real price of a yard of fine cloth must, in those times,
have been equal to at least three pounds six shillings and sixpence

subdivided, and the machinery employed much more imperfect,
than it is at present.

of our present money. The man who bought it must have parted
with the command of a quantity of labour and subsistence equal

In 1487, being the 4th of Henry VII., it was enacted, that “whosoever shall sell by retail a broad yard of the finest scarlet grained,

to what that sum would purchase in the present times.
The reduction in the real price of the coarse manufacture, though

or of other grained cloth of the finest making, above sixteen shillings, shall forfeit forty shillings for every yard so sold.” Sixteen

considerable, has not been so great as in that of the fine.
In 1463, being the 3rd of Edward IV. it was enacted, that “no

shillings, therefore, containing about the same quantity of silver

servant in husbandry nor common labourer, nor servant to any

208

Adam Smith
artificer inhabiting out of a city or burgh, shall use or wear in their
clothing any cloth above two shillings the broad yard.” In the 3rd

money. But fourteen-pence was in those times the price of a bushel
and near two pecks of wheat; which in the present times, at three

of Edward IV., two shillings contained very nearly the same quantity of silver as four of our present money. But the Yorkshire cloth

and sixpence the bushel, would cost five shillings and threepence.
We should in the present times consider this as a very high price

which is now sold at four shillings the yard, is probably much
superior to any that was then made for the wearing of the very

for a pair of stockings to a servant of the poorest and lowest order.
He must however, in those times, have paid what was really equiva-

poorest order of common servants. Even the money price of their
clothing, therefore, may, in proportion to the quality, be some-

lent to this price for them.
In the time of Edward IV. the art of knitting stockings was prob-

what cheaper in the present than it was in those ancient times.
The real price is certainly a good deal cheaper. Tenpence was then

ably not known in any part of Europe. Their hose were made of
common cloth, which may have been one of the causes of their

reckoned what is called the moderate and reasonable price of a
bushel of wheat. Two shillings, therefore, was the price of two

dearness. The first person that wore stockings in England is said
to have been Queen Elizabeth. She received them as a present

bushels and near two pecks of wheat, which in the present times,
at three shillings and sixpence the bushel, would be worth eight

from the Spanish ambassador.
Both in the coarse and in the fine woollen manufacture, the

shillings and ninepence. For a yard of this cloth the poor servant
must have parted with the power of purchasing a quantity of sub-

machinery employed was much more imperfect in those ancient,
than it is in the present times. It has since received three very

sistence equal to what eight shillings and ninepence would purchase in the present times. This is a sumptuary law, too, restrain-

capital improvements, besides, probably, many smaller ones, of
which it may be difficult to ascertain either the number or the

ing the luxury and extravagance of the poor. Their clothing, therefore, had commonly been much more expensive.

importance. The three capital improvements are, first, the exchange
of the rock and spindle for the spinning-wheel, which, with the

The same order of people are, by the same law, prohibited from
wearing hose, of which the price should exceed fourteen-pence

same quantity of labour, will perform more than double the quantity of work. Secondly, the use of several very ingenious machines,

the pair, equal to about eight-and-twenty pence of our present

which facilitate and abridge, in a still greater proportion, the wind-

209

The Wealth of Nations
ing of the worsted and woollen yarn, or the proper arrangement
of the warp and woof before they are put into the loom; an opera-

business from which any of them derived the greater part of their
subsistence. The work which is performed in this manner, it has

tion which, previous to the invention of those machines, must
have been extremely tedious and troublesome. Thirdly, the em-

already been observed, comes always much cheaper to market than
that which is the principal or sole fund of the workman’s subsis-

ployment of the fulling-mill for thickening the cloth, instead of
treading it in water. Neither wind nor water mills of any kind

tence. The fine manufacture, on the other hand, was not, in those
times, carried on in England, but in the rich and commercial coun-

were known in England so early as the beginning of the sixteenth
century, nor, so far as I know, in any other part of Europe north of

try of Flanders; and it was probably conducted then, in the same
manner as now, by people who derived the whole, or the principal

the Alps. They had been introduced into Italy some time before.
The consideration of these circumstances may, perhaps, in some

part of their subsistence from it. It was, besides, a foreign manufacture, and must have paid some duty, the ancient custom of

measure, explain to us why the real price both of the coarse and of
the fine manufacture was so much higher in those ancient than it

tonnage and poundage at least, to the king. This duty, indeed,
would not probably be very great. It was not then the policy of

is in the present times. It cost a greater quantity of labour to bring
the goods to market. When they were brought thither, therefore,

Europe to restrain, by high duties, the importation of foreign
manufactures, but rather to encourage it, in order that merchants

they must have purchased, or exchanged for the price of, a greater
quantity.

might be enabled to supply, at as easy a rate as possible, the great
men with the conveniencies and luxuries which they wanted, and

The coarse manufacture probably was, in those ancient times,
carried on in England in the same manner as it always has been in

which the industry of their own country could not afford them.
The consideration of these circumstances may, perhaps, in some

countries where arts and manufactures are in their infancy. It was
probably a household manufacture, in which every different part

measure explain to us why, in those ancient times, the real price of
the coarse manufacture was, in proportion to that of the fine, so

of the work was occasionally performed by all the different members of almost every private family, but so as to be their work only

much lower than in the present times.

when they had nothing else to do, and not to be the principal

210

Adam Smith
Conclusion of the Chapter.

All those improvements in the productive powers of labour,
which tend directly to reduce the rent price of manufactures, tend

I shall conclude this very long chapter with observing, that every
improvement in the circumstances of the society tends, either di-

indirectly to raise the real rent of land. The landlord exchanges
that part of his rude produce, which is over and above his own

rectly or indirectly, to raise the real rent of land to increase the real
wealth of the landlord, his power of purchasing the labour, or the

consumption, or, what comes to the same thing, the price of that
part of it, for manufactured produce. Whatever reduces the real

produce of the labour of other people.
The extension of improvement and cultivation tends to raise it

price of the latter, raises that of the former. An equal quantity of
the former becomes thereby equivalent to a greater quantity of the

directly. The landlord’s share of the produce necessarily increases
with the increase of the produce.

latter; and the landlord is enabled to purchase a greater quantity
of the conveniencies, ornaments, or luxuries which he has occa-

That rise in the real price of those parts of the rude produce of
land, which is first the effect of the extended improvement and

sion for.
Every increase in the real wealth of the society, every increase in

cultivation, and afterwards the cause of their being still further
extended, the rise in the price of cattle, for example, tends, too, to

the quantity of useful labour employed within it, tends indirectly
to raise the real rent of land. A certain proportion of this labour

raise the rent of land directly, and in a still greater proportion. The
real value of the landlord’s share, his real command of the labour

naturally goes to the land. A greater number of men and cattle are
employed in its cultivation, the produce increases with the in-

of other people, not only rises with the real value of the produce,
but the proportion of his share to the whole produce rises with it.

crease of the stock which is thus employed in raising it, and the
rent increases with the produce.

That produce, after the rise in its real price, requires no more
labour to collect it than before. A smaller proportion of it will,

The contrary circumstances, the neglect of cultivation and improvement, the fall in the real price of any part of the rude pro-

therefore, be sufficient to replace, with the ordinary profit, the
stock which employs that labour. A greater proportion of it must

duce of land, the rise in the real price of manufactures from the
decay of manufacturing art and industry, the declension of the

consequently belong to the landlord.

real wealth of the society, all tend, on the other hand, to lower the

211

The Wealth of Nations
real rent of land, to reduce the real wealth of the landlord, to diminish his power of purchasing either the labour, or the produce

of its own accord, and independent of any plan or project of their
own. That indolence which is the natural effect of the ease and

of the labour, of other people.
The whole annual produce of the land and labour of every coun-

security of their situation, renders them too often, not only ignorant, but incapable of that application of mind, which is necessary

try, or, what comes to the same thing, the whole price of that
annual produce, naturally divides itself, it has already been ob-

in order to foresee and understand the consequence of any public
regulation.

served, into three parts; the rent of land, the wages of labour, and
the profits of stock; and constitutes a revenue to three different

The interest of the second order, that of those who live by wages,
is as strictly connected with the interest of the society as that of

orders of people; to those who live by rent, to those who live by
wages, and to those who live by profit. These are the three great,

the first. The wages of the labourer, it has already been shewn, are
never so high as when the demand for labour is continually rising,

original, and constituent, orders of every civilized society, from
whose revenue that of every other order is ultimately derived.

or when the quantity employed is every year increasing considerably. When this real wealth of the society becomes stationary, his

The interest of the first of those three great orders, it appears
from what has been just now said, is strictly and inseparably con-

wages are soon reduced to what is barely enough to enable him to
bring up a family, or to continue the race of labourers. When the

nected with the general interest of the society. Whatever either
promotes or obstructs the one, necessarily promotes or obstructs

society declines, they fall even below this. The order of proprietors
may perhaps gain more by the prosperity of the society than that

the other. When the public deliberates concerning any regulation
of commerce or police, the proprietors of land never can mislead

of labourers; but there is no order that suffers so cruelly from its
decline. But though the interest of the labourer is strictly con-

it, with a view to promote the interest of their own particular
order; at least, if they have any tolerable knowledge of that inter-

nected with that of the society, he is incapable either of comprehending that interest, or of understanding its connexion with his

est. They are, indeed, too often defective in this tolerable knowledge. They are the only one of the three orders whose revenue

own. His condition leaves him no time to receive the necessary
information, and his education and habits are commonly such as

costs them neither labour nor care, but comes to them, as it were,

to render him unfit to judge, even though he was fully informed.

212

Adam Smith
In the public deliberations, therefore, his voice is little heard, and
less regarded; except upon particular occasions, when his clamour

the interest of their own particular branch of business. than about
that of the society, their judgment, even when given with the great-

is animated, set on, and supported by his employers, not for his,
but their own particular purposes.

est candour (which it has not been upon every occasion), is much
more to be depended upon with regard to the former of those two

His employers constitute the third order, that of those who live
by profit. It is the stock that is employed for the sake of profit,

objects, than with regard to the latter. Their superiority over the
country gentleman is, not so much in their knowledge of the pub-

which puts into motion the greater part of the useful labour of
every society. The plans and projects of the employers of stock

lic interest, as in their having a better knowledge of their own
interest than he has of his. It is by this superior knowledge of their

regulate and direct all the most important operation of labour,
and profit is the end proposed by all those plans and projects. But

own interest that they have frequently imposed upon his generosity, and persuaded him to give up both his own interest and that

the rate of profit does not, like rent and wages, rise with the prosperity, and fall with the declension of the society. On the contrary,

of the public, from a very simple but honest conviction, that their
interest, and not his, was the interest of the public. The interest of

it is naturally low in rich, and high in poor countries, and it is
always highest in the countries which are going fastest to ruin.

the dealers, however, in any particular branch of trade or manufactures, is always in some respects different from, and even oppo-

The interest of this third order, therefore, has not the same
connexion with the general interest of the society, as that of the

site to, that of the public. To widen the market, and to narrow the
competition, is always the interest of the dealers. To widen the

other two. Merchants and master manufacturers are, in this order,
the two classes of people who commonly employ the largest capi-

market may frequently be agreeable enough to the interest of the
public; but to narrow the competition must always be against it,

tals, and who by their wealth draw to themselves the greatest share
of the public consideration. As during their whole lives they are

and can only serve to enable the dealers, by raising their profits
above what they naturally would be, to levy, for their own benefit,

engaged in plans and projects, they have frequently more acuteness of understanding than the greater part of country gentlemen.

an absurd tax upon the rest of their fellow-citizens. The proposal
of any new law or regulation of commerce which comes from this

As their thoughts, however, are commonly exercised rather about

order, ought always to be listened to with great precaution, and

213

The Wealth of Nations
ought never to be adopted till after having been long and carefully
examined, not only with the most scrupulous, but with the most

1247
1257

0 13 5
1 4 0

2 0 0
3 12 0

suspicious attention. It comes from an order of men, whose interest is never exactly the same with that of the public, who have

1258

1 0 0
0 15 0

0 17 0

2 11 0

16 16 0

generally an interest to deceive and even to oppress the public,
and who accordingly have, upon many occasions, both deceived

1270

0 16 0
4 16 0
5 12 0

1286

6 8 0
0 2 8
0 16 0

0 9 4
Total 35 9 3

and oppressed it.
# PRICES OF WHEAT
Year

Prices/Quarter
in each year

Average of different
prices in one year

Average prices of
each year in money
of 1776
£ s d

Average 2 19 1¼
1287
1288

0 3 4
0 0 8

£ s d

£ s d

0 12 0
0 12 0

1 16 0

0 13 4
0 15 0

0 13 5

1223
1237

0 12 0
0 3 4

1 16 0
0 10 0

0 2 0
0 3 4

1243
1244

0 2 0
0 2 0

0 6 0
0 6 0

0 9 4
0 12 0

1246

0 16 0

2 8 0

1202
1205

1 8 0

0 10 0

0 1 0
0 1 4
2 0 3

0 1 6
0 1 8

1289

0 6 0

214

0 3 0¼

0 9 1¾

Adam Smith
0 2 0
0 10 8

0 10 1½

1 10 4½

1349
1359

0 2 0
1 6 8

0 5 2
3 2 2

1361
1363

0 2 0
0 15 0

0 4 8
1 15 0

1 0 0
1 4 0

1290

1 0 0
0 16 0

2 8 0

1294
1302

0 16 0
0 4 0

2 8 0
0 12 0

1369

1309
1315

0 7 2
1 0 0

1 1 6
3 0 0

1379
1387

0 4 0
0 2 0

1316

1 0 0
1 10 0

1390

0 13 4
0 14 0

1 10 6

4 11 6

1 12 0
2 0 0
1317

2 4 0
0 14 0
2 13 0
4 0 0

1336

0 6 8
0 2 0

1338

0 3 4

1339

1401

0 9 0

1407
1 19 6

5 18 6

1416

1 2 0

0 9 4
0 4 8
0 14 5

0 16 0
0 16 0
0 4 4¾
0 3 4

2 9 4

1 13 7
1 17 6

0 3 10

0 8 10

Total

1 12 0
15 9 4

Average

1 5 9½

0 16 0

0 6 0
Total

0 10 0
23 4 11¼

1423
1425

0 8 0
0 4 0

0
0

Average

1 18 8

1434
1435

1 6 8
0 5 4

4
8

1 7 0

1439

1 0 0

215

The Wealth of Nations
1 6 8
1 4 0

1 3 4

2 6 8
2 8 0

1444

0 4 4
0 4 0

0 4 2

0 4 8

1445
1447

0 4 6
0 8 0

0 9 0
0 16 0

1499

0 4 0

0 6 0

1448
1449

0 6 8
0 5 0

0 13 4
0 10 0

1504
1521

0 5 8
1 0 0

0 8 6
1 10 0

1451

0 8 0
Total

0 16 0
12 15 4

1551
1553

0 8 0
0 8 0

0 8 0
0 8 0

Average

1 1 3¹/³

1554
1555

0 8 0
0 8 0

0 8 0
0 8 0

1556
1557

0 8 0
0 8 0

0 8 0

1440

1495
1497

0 3 4
1 0 0

0 5 0
1 11 0
Total
Average

8 9 0
0 14 1

1453
1455

0 5 4
0 1 2

0 10 8
0 2 4

1457
1459

0 7 8
0 5 0

1 15 4
0 10 0

0 4 0
0 5 0

1460
1463

0 8 0
0 2 0

0 16 0
0 3 8

1558

2 13 4
0 8 0

0 8 0

1464

0 1 8
0 6 8

0 10 0

1559
1560

0 8 0
0 8 0

0 8 0
0 8 0

1486
1491

1 4 0
0 14 8

1 17 0
1 2 0

1494

0 4 0

0 6 0

0 1 10

0 17 8½

Total
Average

216

0 17 8½

6 0 2½
0 10 0½

Adam Smith
1561
1562

0 8 0
0 8 0

1574

2 16 0
1 4 0

2 0 0

0 8 0
0 8 0

PRICES OF THE QUARTER OF NINE BUSHELS OF THE
BEST OR HIGHEST PRICED WHEAT AT WINDSOR MAR-

2 0 0

KET, ON LADY DAY AND MICHAELMAS, FROM 1595 TO
1764 BOTH INCLUSIVE; THE PRICE OF EACH YEAR BEING THE MEDIUM BETWEEN THE HIGHEST PRICES
OF THESE TWO MARKET DAYS.

1587
1594

3 4 0
2 16 0

3 4 0
2 16 0

1595
1596

2 13 0
4 0 0

2 13 0
4 0 0

1597

5 4 0
4 0 0

4 12 0

£ s d

4 12 0

1595
1596

2 0 0
2 8 0

1598
1599

2 16 8
1 19 2

2 16 8
1 19 8

1597
1598

3 9 6
2 16 8

1600
1601

1 17 8
1 14 10

1 17 8
1 14 10

1599
1600

1 19 2
1 17 8

28 9 4
2 7 5½

1601
1602

1 14 10
1 9 4

1603
1604

1 15 4
1 10 8

1605
1606

1 15 10
1 13 0

1607
1608

1 16 8
2 16 8

1609

2 10 0

Total
Average

217

The Wealth of Nations
1610
1611

1 15 10
1 18 8

1630
1631

2 15 8
3 8 0

1612
1613

2 2 4
2 8 8

1632
1633

2 13
2 18

4
0

1614
1615

2 1 8½
1 18 8

1634
1635

2 16
2 16

0
0

1616
1617

2 0 4
2 8 8

1636

2 16 8
16)40 0

1618
1619

2 6 8
1 15 4

Average 2 10

0

1620

1 10 4
26)54 0 6½

1637
1638

2 13
2 17

0
4

Average 2 1 6¾

1639
1640

2 4 10
2 4 8

1621
1622

1 10
2 18

4
8

1641
1646

2 8
2 8

1623
1624

2 12 0
2 8 0

1647
1648

3 13 0
4 5 0

1625
1626

2 12 0
2 9 4

1649
1650

4 0 0
3 16 8

1627
1628

1 16 0
1 8 0

1651
1652

3 13 4
2 9 6

1629

2 2

1653

1 15

0

218

0
0

6

0

Adam Smith
1654
1655

1 6 0
1 13 4

1677
1678

2 2 0
2 19 0

1656
1657

2 3
2 6

0
8

1679
1680

3 0
2 5

0
0

1658
1659

3 5
3 6

0
0

1681
1682

2 6
2 4

8
0

1660
1661

2 16
3 10

6
0

1683
1684

2 0
2 4

0
0

1662
1663

3 14
2 17

0
0

1685
1686

2 6 8
1 14 0

1664
1665

2 0
2 9

6
4

1687
1688

1 5
2 6

2
0

1666
1667

1 16
1 16

0
0

1689
1690

1 10
1 14

0
8

1668
1669

2 0
2 4

0
4

1691
1692

1 14 0
2 6 8

1670
1671

2 1
2 2

8
0

1693
1694

3 7
3 4

8
0

1672
1673

2 1
2 6

0
8

1695
1696

2 13
3 11

0
0

1674
1675

3 8
3 4

8
8

1697
1698

3 0
3 8

0
4

1676

1 18

0

1699

3 4

0

219

The Wealth of Nations
1700

2 0 0
60) 153 1

Average 2 11

0¹/³

8

1720
1721

1 17
1 17

0
6

1722
1723

1 16
1 14

0
8

1701
1702

1 17 8
1 9 6

1724
1725

1 17 0
2 8 6

1703
1704

1 16 0
2 6 6

1726
1727

2 6
2 2

1705
1706

1 10 0
1 6 0

1728
1729

2 14 6
2 6 10

1707
1708

1 8
2 1

6
6

1730
1731

1 16 6
1 12 10

1 12 10

1709
1710

3 18
3 18

6
0

1732
1733

1 6
1 8

1 6
1 8

1711
1712

2 14 0
2 6 4

1734
1735

1 18 10
2 3 0

1 18 10
2 3 0

1713
1714

2 11
2 10

0
4

1736
1737

2 0 4
1 18 0

2 0 4
1 18 0

1715
1716

2 3
2 8

0
0

1738
1739

1 15
1 18

6
6

1 15
1 18

1717
1718

2 5 8
1 18 10

1740

2 10

8

2 10 8
10) 18 12

1719

1 15

0

0
0

8
4

8
4

6
6

1 17 3½

220

8

Adam Smith
1741
1742

2 6 8
1 14 0

2 6 8
1 14 0

1761
1762

1 10
1 19

3
0

1743
1744

1 4 10
1 4 10

1 4 10
1 4 10

1763
1764

2 0
2 6

9
9

1745
1746

1 7 6
1 19 0

1 7 6
1 19 0

64) 129 13
Average 2 0 6¾

1747
1748

1 14 10
1 17 0

1 14 10
1 17 0

1749
1750

1 17
1 12

1 17
1 12

0
6

0
6

10) 16 18 2
1 13 9¾
1751

1 18

6

1752
1753

2 1 10
2 4 8

1754
1755

1 13 8
1 14 10

1756
1757

2 5
3 0

1758
1759

2 10 0
1 19 10

1760

1 16

3
0

6

221

6

The Wealth of Nations

BOOK II

price of the produce, of his own. But this purchase cannot be
made till such time as the produce of his own labour has not only

OF THE NATURE, ACCUMULATION,
AND EMPLOYMENT OF STOCK

been completed, but sold. A stock of goods of different kinds,
therefore, must be stored up somewhere, sufficient to maintain

INTRODUCTION

I

N THAT RUDE STATE OF SOCIETY, in which there is no division

of labour, in which exchanges are seldom made, and in which

every man provides every thing for himself, it is not necessary that any stock should be accumulated, or stored up beforehand, in order to carry on the business of the society. Every man
endeavours to supply, by his own industry, his own occasional
wants, as they occur. When he is hungry, he goes to the forest to
hunt; when his coat is worn out, he clothes himself with the skin
of the first large animal he kills: and when his hut begins to go to
ruin, he repairs it, as well as he can, with the trees and the turf that
are nearest it.
But when the division of labour has once been thoroughly introduced, the produce of a man’s own labour can supply but a
very small part of his occasional wants. The far greater part of
them are supplied by the produce of other men’s labour, which he
purchases with the produce, or, what is the same thing, with the

him, and to supply him with the materials and tools of his work,
till such time at least as both these events can be brought about. A
weaver cannot apply himself entirely to his peculiar business, unless there is before-hand stored up somewhere, either in his own
possession, or in that of some other person, a stock sufficient to
maintain him, and to supply him with the materials and tools of
his work, till he has not only completed, but sold his web. This
accumulation must evidently be previous to his applying his industry for so long a time to such a peculiar business.
As the accumulation of stock must, in the nature of things, be
previous to the division of labour, so labour can be more and more
subdivided in proportion only as stock is previously more and
more accumulated. The quantity of materials which the same
number of people can work up, increases in a great proportion as
labour comes to be more and more subdivided; and as the operations of each workman are gradually reduced to a greater degree of
simplicity, a variety of new machines come to be invented for facilitating and abridging those operations. As the division of labour
advances, therefore, in order to give constant employment to an

222

Adam Smith
equal number of workmen, an equal stock of provisions, and a
greater stock of materials and tools than what would have been

industry and its productive powers.
In the following book, I have endeavoured to explain the nature

necessary in a ruder state of things, must be accumulated beforehand. But the number of workmen in every branch of business

of stock, the effects of its accumulation into capital of different
kinds, and the effects of the different employments of those capi-

generally increases with the division of labour in that branch; or
rather it is the increase of their number which enables them to

tals. This book is divided into five chapters. In the first chapter, I
have endeavoured to shew what are the different parts or branches

class and subdivide themselves in this manner.
As the accumulation of stock is previously necessary for carry-

into which the stock, either of an individual, or of a great society,
naturally divides itself. In the second, I have endeavoured to ex-

ing on this great improvement in the productive powers of labour,
so that accumulation naturally leads to this improvement. The

plain the nature and operation of money, considered as a particular branch of the general stock of the society. The stock which is

person who employs his stock in maintaining labour, necessarily
wishes to employ it in such a manner as to produce as great a

accumulated into a capital, may either be employed by the person
to whom it belongs, or it may be lent to some other person. In the

quantity of work as possible. He endeavours, therefore, both to
make among his workmen the most proper distribution of em-

third and fourth chapters, I have endeavoured to examine the
manner in which it operates in both these situations. The fifth

ployment, and to furnish them with the best machines which he
can either invent or afford to purchase. His abilities, in both these

and last chapter treats of the different effects which the different
employments of capital immediately produce upon the quantity,

respects, are generally in proportion to the extent of his stock, or
to the number of people whom it can employ. The quantity of

both of national industry, and of the annual produce of land and
labour.

industry, therefore, not only increases in every country with the
increase of the stock which employs it, but, in consequence of
that increase, the same quantity of industry produces a much greater
quantity of work.
Such are in general the effects of the increase of stock upon

223

The Wealth of Nations

CHAPTER I

sumed, such as a stock of clothes, household furniture, and the
like. In one or other, or all of these three articles, consists the stock

OF THE DIVISION OF STOCK

which men commonly reserve for their own immediate consumption.

WHEN THE STOCK which a man possesses is no more than sufficient to maintain him for a few days or a few weeks, he seldom

There are two different ways in which a capital may be employed so as to yield a revenue or profit to its employer.

thinks of deriving any revenue from it. He consumes it as sparingly as he can, and endeavours, by his labour, to acquire some-

First, it maybe employed in raising, manufacturing, or purchasing goods, and selling them again with a profit. The capital em-

thing which may supply its place before it be consumed altogether.
His revenue is, in this case, derived from his labour only. This is

ployed in this manner yields no revenue or profit to its employer,
while it either remains in his possession, or continues in the same

the state of the greater part of the labouring poor in all countries.
But when he possesses stock sufficient to maintain him for

shape. The goods of the merchant yield him no revenue or profit
till he sells them for money, and the money yields him as little till

months or years, he naturally endeavours to derive a revenue from
the greater part of it, reserving only so much for his immediate

it is again exchanged for goods. His capital is continually going
from him in one shape, and returning to him in another; and it is

consumption as may maintain him till this revenue begins to come
in. His whole stock, therefore, is distinguished into two parts.

only by means of such circulation, or successive changes, that it
can yield him any profit. Such capitals, therefore, may very prop-

That part which he expects is to afford him this revenue is called
his capital. The other is that which supplies his immediate con-

erly be called circulating capitals.
Secondly, it may be employed in the improvement of land, in

sumption, and which consists either, first, in that portion of his
whole stock which was originally reserved for this purpose; or,

the purchase of useful machines and instruments of trade, or in
such like things as yield a revenue or profit without changing

secondly, in his revenue, from whatever source derived, as it gradually comes in; or, thirdly, in such things as had been purchased by

masters, or circulating any further. Such capitals, therefore, may
very properly be called fixed capitals.

either of these in former years, and which are not yet entirely con-

Different occupations require very different proportions between

224

Adam Smith
the fixed and circulating capitals employed in them.
The capital of a merchant, for example, is altogether a circulat-

capital. He makes a profit of the one by keeping it in his own
possession, and of the other by parting with it. The price or value

ing capital. He has occasion for no machines or instruments of
trade, unless his shop or warehouse be considered as such.

of his labouring cattle is a fixed capital, in the same manner as that
of the instruments of husbandry; their maintenance is a circulat-

Some part of the capital of every master artificer or manufacturer must be fixed in the instruments of his trade. This part,

ing capital, in the same manner as that of the labouring servants.
The farmer makes his profit by keeping the labouring cattle, and

however, is very small in some, and very great in others, A master
tailor requires no other instruments of trade but a parcel of needles.

by parting with their maintenance. Both the price and the maintenance of the cattle which are bought in and fattened, not for

Those of the master shoemaker are a little, though but a very little,
more expensive. Those of the weaver rise a good deal above those

labour, but for sale, are a circulating capital. The farmer makes his
profit by parting with them. A flock of sheep or a herd of cattle,

of the shoemaker. The far greater part of the capital of all such
master artificers, however, is circulated either in the wages of their

that, in a breeding country, is brought in neither for labour nor
for sale, but in order to make a profit by their wool, by their milk,

workmen, or in the price of their materials, and repaid, with a
profit, by the price of the work.

and by their increase, is a fixed capital. The profit is made by
keeping them. Their maintenance is a circulating capital. The profit

In other works a much greater fixed capital is required. In a
great iron-work, for example, the furnace for melting the ore, the

is made by parting with it; and it comes back with both its own
profit and the profit upon the whole price of the cattle, in the

forge, the slit-mill, are instruments of trade which cannot be erected
without a very great expense. In coal works, and mines of every

price of the wool, the milk, and the increase. The whole value of
the seed, too, is properly a fixed capital. Though it goes backwards

kind, the machinery necessary, both for drawing out the water,
and for other purposes, is frequently still more expensive.

and forwards between the ground and the granary, it never changes
masters, and therefore does not properly circulate. The farmer

That part of the capital of the farmer which is employed in the
instruments of agriculture is a fixed, that which is employed in the

makes his profit, not by its sale, but by its increase.
The general stock of any country or society is the same with

wages and maintenance of his labouring servants is a circulating

that of all its inhabitants or members; and, therefore, naturally

225

The Wealth of Nations
divides itself into the same three portions, each of which has a
distinct function or office.

gree increased by it. Clothes and household furniture, in the same
manner, sometimes yield a revenue, and thereby serve in the func-

The first is that portion which is reserved for immediate consumption, and of which the characteristic is, that it affords no

tion of a capital to particular persons. In countries where masquerades are common, it is a trade to let out masquerade dresses

revenue or profit. It consists in the stock of food, clothes, household furniture, etc. which have been purchased by their proper

for a night. Upholsterers frequently let furniture by the month or
by the year. Undertakers let the furniture of funerals by the day

consumers, but which are not yet entirely consumed. The whole
stock of mere dwelling-houses, too, subsisting at anyone time in

and by the week. Many people let furnished houses, and get a
rent, not only for the use of the house, but for that of the furni-

the country, make a part of this first portion. The stock that is laid
out in a house, if it is to be the dwelling-house of the proprietor,

ture. The revenue, however, which is derived from such things,
must always be ultimately drawn from some other source of rev-

ceases from that moment to serve in the function of a capital, or
to afford any revenue to its owner. A dwelling-house, as such,

enue. Of all parts of the stock, either of an individual or of a
society, reserved for immediate consumption, what is laid out in

contributes nothing to the revenue of its inhabitant; and though
it is, no doubt, extremely useful to him, it is as his clothes and

houses is most slowly consumed. A stock of clothes may last several years; a stock of furniture half a century or a century; but a

household furniture are useful to him, which, however, make a
part of his expense, and not of his revenue. If it is to be let to a

stock of houses, well built and properly taken care of, may last
many centuries. Though the period of their total consumption,

tenant for rent, as the house itself can produce nothing, the tenant
must always pay the rent out of some other revenue, which he

however, is more distant, they are still as really a stock reserved for
immediate consumption as either clothes or household furniture.

derives, either from labour, or stock, or land. Though a house,
therefore, may yield a revenue to its proprietor, and thereby serve

The second of the three portions into which the general stock
of the society divides itself, is the fixed capital; of which the char-

in the function of a capital to him, it cannot yield any to the
public, nor serve in the function of a capital to it, and the revenue

acteristic is, that it affords a revenue or profit without circulating
or changing masters. It consists chiefly of the four following ar-

of the whole body of the people can never be in the smallest de-

ticles.

226

Adam Smith
First, of all useful machines and instruments of trade, which
facilitate and abridge labour.

apprenticeship, always costs a real expense, which is a capital fixed
and realized, as it were, in his person. Those talents, as they make

Secondly, of all those profitable buildings which are the means
of procuring a revenue, not only to the proprietor who lets them

a part of his fortune, so do they likewise that of the society to
which he belongs. The improved dexterity of a workman may be

for a rent, but to the person who possesses them, and pays that
rent for them; such as shops, warehouses, work-houses, farm-

considered in the same light as a machine or instrument of trade
which facilitates and abridges labour, and which, though it costs a

houses, with all their necessary buildings, stables, granaries, etc.
These are very different from mere dwelling-houses. They are a

certain expense, repays that expense with a profit.
The third and last of the three portions into which the general

sort of instruments of trade, and may be considered in the same
light.

stock of the society naturally divides itself, is the circulating capital,
of which the characteristic is, that it affords a revenue only by circu-

Thirdly, of the improvements of land, of what has been profitably laid out in clearing, draining, inclosing, manuring, and re-

lating or changing masters. It is composed likewise of four parts.
First, of the money, by means of which all the other three are

ducing it into the condition most proper for tillage and culture.
An improved farm may very justly be regarded in the same light as

circulated and distributed to their proper consumers.
Secondly, of the stock of provisions which are in the possession

those useful machines which facilitate and abridge labour, and by
means of which an equal circulating capital can afford a much

of the butcher, the grazier, the farmer, the corn-merchant, the
brewer, etc. and from the sale of which they expect to derive a

greater revenue to its employer. An improved farm is equally advantageous and more durable than any of those machines, fre-

profit.
Thirdly, of the materials, whether altogether rude, or more or

quently requiring no other repairs than the most profitable application of the farmer’s capital employed in cultivating it.

less manufactured, of clothes, furniture, and building which are
not yet made up into any of those three shapes, but which remain

Fourthly, of the acquired and useful abilities of all the inhabitants and members of the society. The acquisition of such talents,

in the hands of the growers, the manufacturers, the mercers, and
drapers, the timber-merchants, the carpenters and joiners, the

by the maintenance of the acquirer during his education, study, or

brick-makers, etc.

227

The Wealth of Nations
Fourthly, and lastly, of the work which is made up and completed, but which is still in the hands of the merchant and manu-

will produce nothing, without the circulating capital, which affords the materials they are employed upon, and the maintenance

facturer, and not yet disposed of or distributed to the proper consumers; such as the finished work which we frequently find ready

of the workmen who employ them. Land, however improved, will
yield no revenue without a circulating capital, which maintains

made in the shops of the smith, the cabinet-maker, the goldsmith,
the jeweller, the china-merchant, etc. The circulating capital con-

the labourers who cultivate and collect its produce.
To maintain and augment the stock which maybe reserved for

sists, in this manner, of the provisions, materials, and finished
work of all kinds that are in the hands of their respective dealers,

immediate consumption, is the sole end and purpose both of the
fixed and circulating capitals. It is this stock which feeds, clothes,

and of the money that is necessary for circulating and distributing
them to those who are finally to use or to consume them.

and lodges the people. Their riches or poverty depend upon the
abundant or sparing supplies which those two capitals can afford

Of these four parts, three—provisions, materials, and finished
work, are either annually or in a longer or shorter period, regu-

to the stock reserved for immediate consumption.
So great a part of the circulating capital being continually with-

larly withdrawn from it, and placed either in the fixed capital, or
in the stock reserved for immediate consumption.

drawn from it, in order to be placed in the other two branches of
the general stock of the society, it must in its turn require con-

Every fixed capital is both originally derived from, and requires
to be continually supported by, a circulating capital. All useful

tinual supplies without which it would soon cease to exist. These
supplies are principally drawn from three sources; the produce of

machines and instruments of trade are originally derived from a
circulating capital, which furnishes the materials of which they

land, of mines, and of fisheries. These afford continual supplies of
provisions and materials, of which part is afterwards wrought up

are made, and the maintenance of the workmen who make them.
They require, too, a capital of the same kind to keep them in

into finished work and by which are replaced the provisions, materials, and finished work, continually withdrawn from the circu-

constant repair.
No fixed capital can yield any revenue but by means of a circu-

lating capital. From mines, too, is drawn what is necessary for
maintaining and augmenting that part of it which consists in

lating capital The most useful machines and instruments of trade

money. For though, in the ordinary course of business, this part is

228

Adam Smith
not, like the other three, necessarily withdrawn from it, in order
to be placed in the other two branches of the general stock of the

capitals with which fisheries and mines are cultivated. It is the
produce of land which draws the fish from the waters; and it is the

society, it must, however, like all other things, be wasted and worn
out at last, and sometimes, too, be either lost or sent abroad, and

produce of the surface of the earth which extracts the minerals
from its bowels.

must, therefore, require continual, though no doubt much smaller
supplies.

The produce of land, mines, and fisheries, when their natural
fertility is equal, is in proportion to the extent and proper appli-

Lands, mines, and fisheries, require all both a fixed and circulating capital to cultivate them; and their produce replaces, with a

cation of the capitals employed about them. When the capitals
are equal, and equally well applied, it is in proportion to their

profit not only those capitals, but all the others in the society.
Thus the farmer annually replaces to the manufacturer the provi-

natural fertility.
In all countries where there is a tolerable security, every man of

sions which he had consumed, and the materials which he had
wrought up the year before; and the manufacturer replaces to the

common understanding will endeavour to employ whatever stock
he can command, in procuring either present enjoyment or future

farmer the finished work which he had wasted and worn out in
the same time. This is the real exchange that is annually made

profit. If it is employed in procuring present enjoyment, it is a
stock reserved for immediate consumption. If it is employed in

between those two orders of people, though it seldom happens
that the rude produce of the one, and the manufactured produce

procuring future profit, it must procure this profit either by staying with him, or by going from him. In the one case it is a fixed, in

of the other, are directly bartered for one another; because it seldom happens that the farmer sells his corn and his cattle, his flax

the other it is a circulating capital. A man must be perfectly crazy,
who, where there is a tolerable security, does not employ all the

and his wool, to the very same person of whom he chuses to purchase the clothes, furniture, and instruments of trade, which he

stock which he commands, whether it be his own, or borrowed of
other people, in some one or other of those three ways.

wants. He sells, therefore, his rude produce for money, with which
he can purchase, wherever it is to be had, the manufactured pro-

In those unfortunate countries, indeed, where men are continually afraid of the violence of their superiors, they frequently bury

duce he has occasion for. Land even replaces, in part at least, the

or conceal a great part of their stock, in order to have it always at

229

The Wealth of Nations
hand to carry with them to some place of safety, in case of their
being threatened with any of those disasters to which they con-

CHAPTER II

sider themselves at all times exposed. This is said to be a common
practice in Turkey, in Indostan, and, I believe, in most other gov-

OF MONEY, CONSIDERED AS A PARTICULAR BRANCH OF THE GENERAL
STOCK OF THE SOCIETY, OR OF THE
EXPENSE OF MAINTAINING THE NATIONAL CAPITAL

ernments of Asia. It seems to have been a common practice among
our ancestors during the violence of the feudal government. Treasure-trove was, in these times, considered as no contemptible part
of the revenue of the greatest sovereigns in Europe. It consisted in
such treasure as was found concealed in the earth, and to which
no particular person could prove any right. This was regarded, in

IT HAS BEEN SHOWN in the First Book, that the price of the greater
part of commodities resolves itself into three parts, of which one

those times, as so important an object, that it was always considered as belonging to the sovereign, and neither to the finder nor to

pays the wages of the labour, another the profits of the stock, and
a third the rent of the land which had been employed in produc-

the proprietor of the land, unless the right to it had been conveyed
to the latter by an express clause in his charter. It was put upon the

ing and bringing them to market: that there are, indeed, some
commodities of which the price is made up of two of those parts

same footing with gold and silver mines, which, without a special
clause in the charter, were never supposed to be comprehended in

only, the wages of labour, and the profits of stock; and a very few
in which it consists altogether in one, the wages of labour; but

the general grant of the lands, though mines of lead, copper, tin,
and coal were, as things of smaller consequence.

that the price of every commodity necessarily resolves itself into
some one or other, or all, of those three parts; every part of it
which goes neither to rent nor to wages, being necessarily profit to
some body.
Since this is the case, it has been observed, with regard to every
particular commodity, taken separately, it must be so with regard
to all the commodities which compose the whole annual produce

230

Adam Smith
of the land and labour of every country, taken complexly. The
whole price or exchangeable value of that annual produce must

lating capital, or what, without encroaching upon their capital,
they can place in their stock reserved for immediate consump-

resolve itself into the same three parts, and be parcelled out among
the different inhabitants of the country, either as the wages of

tion, or spend upon their subsistence, conveniencies, and amusements. Their real wealth, too, is in proportion, not to their gross,

their labour, the profits of their stock, or the rent of their land.
But though the whole value of the annual produce of the land

but to their neat revenue.
The whole expense of maintaining the fixed capital must evi-

and labour of every country, is thus divided among, and constitutes a revenue to, its different inhabitants; yet, as in the rent of a

dently be excluded from the neat revenue of the society. Neither
the materials necessary for supporting their useful machines and

private estate, we distinguish between the gross rent and the neat
rent, so may we likewise in the revenue of all the inhabitants of a

instruments of trade, their profitable buildings, etc. nor the produce of the labour necessary for fashioning those materials into

great country.
The gross rent of a private estate comprehends whatever is paid

the proper form, can ever make any part of it. The price of that
labour may indeed make a part of it; as the workmen so employed

by the farmer; the neat rent, what remains free to the landlord,
after deducting the expense of management, of repairs, and all

may place the whole value of their wages in their stock reserved
for immediate consumption. But in other sorts of labour, both

other necessary charges; or what, without hurting his estate, he
can afford to place in his stock reserved for immediate consump-

the price and the produce go to this stock; the price to that of the
workmen, the produce to that of other people, whose subsistence,

tion, or to spend upon his table, equipage, the ornaments of his
house and furniture, his private enjoyments and amusements. His

conveniencies, and amusements, are augmented by the labour of
those workmen.

real wealth is in proportion, not to his gross, but to his neat rent.
The gross revenue of all the inhabitants of a great country com-

The intention of the fixed capital is to increase the productive
powers of labour, or to enable the same number of labourers to

prehends the whole annual produce of their land and labour; the
neat revenue, what remains free to them, after deducting the ex-

perform a much greater quantity of work. In a farm where all the
necessary buildings, fences, drains, communications, etc. are in

pense of maintaining first, their fixed, and, secondly, their circu-

the most perfect good order, the same number of labourers and

231

The Wealth of Nations
labouring cattle will raise a much greater produce, than in one of
equal extent and equally good ground, but not furnished with

only for performing. The undertaker of some great manufactory,
who employs a thousand a-year in the maintenance of his ma-

equal conveniencies. In manufactures, the same number of hands,
assisted with the best machinery, will work up a much greater

chinery, if he can reduce this expense to five hundred, will naturally employ the other five hundred in purchasing an additional

quantity of goods than with more imperfect instruments of trade.
The expense which is properly laid out upon a fixed capital of any

quantity of materials, to be wrought up by an additional number
of workmen. The quantity of that work, therefore, which his ma-

kind, is always repaid with great profit, and increases the annual
produce by a much greater value than that of the support which

chinery was useful only for performing, will naturally be augmented, and with it all the advantage and conveniency which the

such improvements require. This support, however, still requires a
certain portion of that produce. A certain quantity of materials,

society can derive from that work.
The expense of maintaining the fixed capital in a great country,

and the labour of a certain number of workmen, both of which
might have been immediately employed to augment the food,

may very properly be compared to that of repairs in a private estate. The expense of repairs may frequently be necessary for sup-

clothing, and lodging, the subsistence and conveniencies of the
society, are thus diverted to another employment, highly advanta-

porting the produce of the estate, and consequently both the gross
and the neat rent of the landlord. When by a more proper direc-

geous indeed, but still different from this one. It is upon this account that all such improvements in mechanics, as enable the same

tion, however, it can be diminished without occasioning any diminution of produce, the gross rent remains at least the same as be-

number of workmen to perform an equal quantity of work with
cheaper and simpler machinery than had been usual before, are

fore, and the neat rent is necessarily augmented.
But though the whole expense of maintaining the fixed capital

always regarded as advantageous to every society. A certain quantity of materials, and the labour of a certain number of workmen,

is thus necessarily excluded from the neat revenue of the society, it
is not the same case with that of maintaining the circulating capi-

which had before been employed in supporting a more complex
and expensive machinery, can afterwards be applied to augment

tal. Of the four parts of which this latter capital is composed,
money, provisions, materials, and finished work, the three last, it

the quantity of work which that or any other machinery is useful

has already been observed, are regularly withdrawn from it, and

232

Adam Smith
placed either in the fixed capital of the society, or in their stock
reserved for immediate consumption. Whatever portion of those

The fixed capital, and that part of the circulating capital which
consists in money, so far as they affect the revenue of the society,

consumable goods is not employed in maintaining the former,
goes all to the latter, and makes a part of the neat revenue of the

bear a very great resemblance to one another.
First, as those machines and instruments of trade, etc. require a

society. The maintenance of those three parts of the circulating
capital, therefore, withdraws no portion of the annual produce

certain expense, first to erect them, and afterwards to support them,
both which expenses, though they make a part of the gross, are

from the neat revenue of the society, besides what is necessary for
maintaining the fixed capital.

deductions from the neat revenue of the society; so the stock of
money which circulates in any country must require a certain ex-

The circulating capital of a society is in this respect different
from that of an individual. That of an individual is totally ex-

pense, first to collect it, and afterwards to support it; both which
expenses, though they make a part of the gross, are, in the same

cluded from making any part of his neat revenue, which must
consist altogether in his profits. But though the circulating capital

manner, deductions from the neat revenue of the society. A certain
quantity of very valuable materials, gold and silver, and of very cu-

of every individual makes a part of that of the society to which he
belongs, it is not upon that account totally excluded from making

rious labour, instead of augmenting the stock reserved for immediate consumption, the subsistence, conveniencies, and amusements

a part likewise of their neat revenue. Though the whole goods in a
merchant’s shop must by no means be placed in his own stock

of individuals, is employed in supporting that great but expensive
instrument of commerce, by means of which every individual in

reserved for immediate consumption, they may in that of other
people, who, from a revenue derived from other funds, may regu-

the society has his subsistence, conveniencies, and amusements, regularly distributed to him in their proper proportions.

larly replace their value to him, together with its profits, without
occasioning any diminution either of his capital or of theirs.

Secondly, as the machines and instruments of trade, etc. which
compose the fixed capital either of an individual or of a society,

Money, therefore, is the only part of the circulating capital of a
society, of which the maintenance can occasion any diminution

make no part either of the gross or of the neat revenue of either; so
money, by means of which the whole revenue of the society is

in their neat revenue.

regularly distributed among all its different members, makes itself

233

The Wealth of Nations
no part of that revenue. The great wheel of circulation is altogether different from the goods which are circulated by means of

purchase or consume; we mean commonly to ascertain what is or
ought to be his way of living, or the quantity and quality of the

it. The revenue of the society consists altogether in those goods,
and not in the wheel which circulates them. In computing either

necessaries and conveniencies of life in which he can with propriety indulge himself.

the gross or the neat revenue of any society, we must always, from
the whole annual circulation of money and goods, deduct the whole

When, by any particular sum of money, we mean not only to
express the amount of the metal pieces of which it is composed,

value of the money, of which not a single farthing can ever make
any part of either.

but to include in its signification some obscure reference to the
goods which can be had in exchange for them, the wealth or rev-

It is the ambiguity of language only which can make this proposition appear either doubtful or paradoxical. When properly ex-

enue which it in this case denotes, is equal only to one of the two
values which are thus intimated somewhat ambiguously by the

plained and understood, it is almost self-evident.
When we talk of any particular sum of money, we sometimes

same word, and to the latter more properly than to the former, to
the money’s worth more properly than to the money.

mean nothing but the metal pieces of which it is composed, and
sometimes we include in our meaning some obscure reference to

Thus, if a guinea be the weekly pension of a particular person,
he can in the course of the week purchase with it a certain quan-

the goods which can be had in exchange for it, or to the power of
purchasing which the possession of it conveys. Thus, when we say

tity of subsistence, conveniencies, and amusements. In proportion as this quantity is great or small, so are his real riches, his real

that the circulating money of England has been computed at eighteen millions, we mean only to express the amount of the metal

weekly revenue. His weekly revenue is certainly not equal both to
the guinea and to what can be purchased with it, but only to one

pieces, which some writers have computed, or rather have supposed, to circulate in that country. But when we say that a man is

or other of those two equal values, and to the latter more properly
than to the former, to the guinea’s worth rather than to the guinea.

worth fifty or a hundred pounds a-year, we mean commonly to
express, not only the amount of the metal pieces which are annu-

If the pension of such a person was paid to him, not in gold, but
in a weekly bill for a guinea, his revenue surely would not so prop-

ally paid to him, but the value of the goods which he can annually

erly consist in the piece of paper, as in what he could get for it. A

234

Adam Smith
guinea may be considered as a bill for a certain quantity of necessaries and conveniencies upon all the tradesmen in the

But if this is sufficiently evident, even with regard to an individual, it is still more so with regard to a society. The amount of

neighbourhood The revenue of the person to whom it is paid,
does not so properly consist in the piece of gold, as in what he can

the metal pieces which are annually paid to an individual, is often
precisely equal to his revenue, and is upon that account the short-

get for it, or in what he can exchange it for. If it could be exchanged for nothing, it would, like a bill upon a bankrupt, be of

est and best expression of its value. But the amount of the metal
pieces which circulate in a society, can never be equal to the rev-

no more value than the most useless piece of paper.
Though the weekly or yearly revenue of all the different inhab-

enue of all its members. As the same guinea which pays the weekly
pension of one man to-day, may pay that of another to-morrow,

itants of any country, in the same manner, may be, and in reality
frequently is, paid to them in money, their real riches, however,

and that of a third the day thereafter, the amount of the metal
pieces which annually circulate in any country, must always be of

the real weekly or yearly revenue of all of them taken together,
must always be great or small, in proportion to the quantity of

much less value than the whole money pensions annually paid
with them. But the power of purchasing, or the goods which can

consumable goods which they can all of them purchase with this
money. The whole revenue of all of them taken together is evi-

successively be bought with the whole of those money pensions,
as they are successively paid, must always be precisely of the same

dently not equal to both the money and the consumable goods,
but only to one or other of those two values, and to the latter

value with those pensions; as must likewise be the revenue of the
different persons to whom they are paid. That revenue, therefore,

more properly than to the former.
Though we frequently, therefore, express a person’s revenue by

cannot consist in those metal pieces, of which the amount is so
much inferior to its value, but in the power of purchasing, in the

the metal pieces which are annually paid to him, it is because the
amount of those pieces regulates the extent of his power of purchas-

goods which can successively be bought with them as they circulate from hand to hand.

ing, or the value of the goods which he can annually afford to consume. We still consider his revenue as consisting in this power of

Money, therefore, the great wheel of circulation, the great instrument of commerce, like all other instruments of trade, though it

purchasing or consuming, and not in the pieces which convey it.

makes a part, and a very valuable part, of the capital, makes no part

235

The Wealth of Nations
of the revenue of the society to which it belongs; and though the
metal pieces of which it is composed, in the course of their annual

ductive powers of labour, must increase the fund which puts industry into motion, and consequently the annual produce of land

circulation, distribute to every man the revenue which properly belongs to him, they make themselves no part of that revenue.

and labour, the real revenue of every society.
The substitution of paper in the room of gold and silver money,

Thirdly, and lastly, the machines and instruments of trade, etc.
which compose the fixed capital, bear this further resemblance to

replaces a very expensive instrument of commerce with one much
less costly, and sometimes equally convenient. Circulation comes

that part of the circulating capital which consists in money; that
as every saving in the expense of erecting and supporting those

to be carried on by a new wheel, which it costs less both to erect
and to maintain than the old one. But in what manner this opera-

machines, which does not diminish the introductive powers of
labour, is an improvement of the neat revenue of the society; so

tion is performed, and in what manner it tends to increase either
the gross or the neat revenue of the society, is not altogether so

every saving in the expense of collecting and supporting that part
of the circulating capital which consists in money is an improve-

obvious, and may therefore require some further explication.
There are several different sorts of paper money; but the circu-

ment of exactly the same kind.
It is sufficiently obvious, and it has partly, too, been explained

lating notes of banks and bankers are the species which is best
known, and which seems best adapted for this purpose.

already, in what manner every saving in the expense of supporting
the fixed capital is an improvement of the neat revenue of the

When the people of any particular country have such confidence in the fortune, probity and prudence of a particular banker,

society. The whole capital of the undertaker of every work is necessarily divided between his fixed and his circulating capital. While

as to believe that he is always ready to pay upon demand such of
his promissory notes as are likely to be at any time presented to

his whole capital remains the same, the smaller the one part, the
greater must necessarily be the other. It is the circulating capital

him, those notes come to have the same currency as gold and
silver money, from the confidence that such money can at any

which furnishes the materials and wages of labour, and puts industry into motion. Every saving, therefore, in the expense of

time be had for them.
A particular banker lends among his customers his own promis-

maintaining the fixed capital, which does not diminish the pro-

sory notes, to the extent, we shall suppose, of a hundred thousand

236

Adam Smith
pounds. As those notes serve all the purposes of money, his debtors pay him the same interest as if he had lent them so much

million sterling, that sum being then sufficient for circulating the
whole annual produce of their land and labour; let us suppose,

money. This interest is the source of his gain. Though some of
those notes are continually coming back upon him for payment,

too, that some time thereafter, different banks and bankers issued
promissory notes payable to the bearer, to the extent of one mil-

part of them continue to circulate for months and years together.
Though he has generally in circulation, therefore, notes to the

lion, reserving in their different coffers two hundred thousand
pounds for answering occasional demands; there would remain,

extent of a hundred thousand pounds, twenty thousand pounds
in gold and silver may, frequently, be a sufficient provision for

therefore, in circulation, eight hundred thousand pounds in gold
and silver, and a million of bank notes, or eighteen hundred thou-

answering occasional demands. By this operation, therefore, twenty
thousand pounds in gold and silver perform all the functions which

sand pounds of paper and money together. But the annual produce of the land and labour of the country had before required

a hundred thousand could otherwise have performed. The same
exchanges may be made, the same quantity of consumable goods

only one million to circulate and distribute it to its proper consumers, and that annual produce cannot be immediately aug-

may be circulated and distributed to their proper consumers, by
means of his promissory notes, to the value of a hundred thou-

mented by those operations of banking. One million, therefore,
will be sufficient to circulate it after them. The goods to be bought

sand pounds, as by an equal value of gold and silver money. Eighty
thousand pounds of gold and silver, therefore, can in this manner

and sold being precisely the same as before, the same quantity of
money will be sufficient for buying and selling them. The channel

be spared from the circulation of the country; and if different
operations of the the same kind should, at the same time, be car-

of circulation, if I may be allowed such an expression, will remain
precisely the same as before. One million we have supposed suffi-

ried on by many different banks and bankers, the whole circulation may thus be conducted with a fifth part only of the gold and

cient to fill that channel. Whatever, therefore, is poured into it
beyond this sum, cannot run into it, but must overflow. One mil-

silver which would otherwise have been requisite.
Let us suppose, for example, that the whole circulating money

lion eight hundred thousand pounds are poured into it. Eight
hundred thousand pounds, therefore, must overflow, that sum

of some particular country amounted, at a particular time, to one

being over and above what can be employed in the circulation of

237

The Wealth of Nations
the country. But though this sum cannot be employed at home, it
is too valuable to be allowed to lie idle. It will, therefore, be sent

If they employ it in purchasing foreign goods for home consumption, they may either, first, purchase such goods as are likely to be

abroad, in order to seek that profitable employment which it cannot find at home. But the paper cannot go abroad; because at a

consumed by idle people, who produce nothing, such as foreign
wines, foreign silks, etc.; or, secondly, they may purchase an addi-

distance from the banks which issue it, and from the country in
which payment of it can be exacted by law, it will not be received

tional stock of materials, tools, and provisions, in order to maintain
and employ an additional number of industrious people, who re-

in common payments. Gold and silver, therefore, to the amount
of eight hundred thousand pounds, will be sent abroad, and the

produce, with a profit, the value of their annual consumption.
So far as it is employed in the first way, it promotes prodigality,

channel of home circulation will remain filled with a million of
paper instead of a million of those metals which filled it before.

increases expense and consumption, without increasing production, or establishing any permanent fund for supporting that ex-

But though so great a quantity of gold and silver is thus sent
abroad, we must not imagine that it is sent abroad for nothing, or

pense, and is in every respect hurtful to the society.
So far as it is employed in the second way, it promotes industry;

that its proprietors make a present of it to foreign nations. They
will exchange it for foreign goods of some kind or another, in

and though it increases the consumption of the society, it provides
a permanent fund for supporting that consumption; the people

order to supply the consumption either of some other foreign country, or of their own.

who consume reproducing, with a profit, the whole value of their
annual consumption. The gross revenue of the society, the annual

If they employ it in purchasing goods in one foreign country, in
order to supply the consumption of another, or in what is called

produce of their land and labour, is increased by the whole value
which the labour of those workmen adds to the materials upon

the carrying trade, whatever profit they make will be in addition
to the neat revenue of their own country. It is like a new fund,

which they are employed, and their neat revenue by what remains
of this value, after deducting what is necessary for supporting the

created for carrying on a new trade; domestic business being now
transacted by paper, and the gold and silver being converted into

tools and instruments of their trade.
That the greater part of the gold and silver which being forced

a fund for this new trade.

abroad by those operations of banking, is employed in purchasing

238

Adam Smith
foreign goods for home consumption, is, and must be, employed
in purchasing those of this second kind, seems not only probable,

ished work; the other, which consists in money, and which serves
only to circulate those three, must always be deducted. In order to put

but almost unavoidable. Though some particular men may sometimes increase their expense very considerably, though their rev-

industry into motion, three things are requisite; materials to work
upon, tools to work with, and the wages or recompence for the sake

enue does not increase at all, we maybe assured that no class or
order of men ever does so; because, though the principles of com-

of which the work is done. Money is neither a material to work upon,
nor a tool to work with; and though the wages of the workman are

mon prudence do not always govern the conduct of every individual, they always influence that of the majority of every class or

commonly paid to him in money, his real revenue, like that of all
other men, consists, not in the money, but in the money’s worth; not

order. But the revenue of idle people, considered as a class or order, cannot, in the smallest degree, be increased by those opera-

in the metal pieces, but in what can be got for them.
The quantity of industry which any capital can employ, must

tions of banking. Their expense in general, therefore, cannot be
much increased by them, though that of a few individuals among

evidently be equal to the number of workmen whom it can supply with materials, tools, and a maintenance suitable to the nature

them may, and in reality sometimes is. The demand of idle people,
therefore, for foreign goods, being the same, or very nearly the

of the work. Money may be requisite for purchasing the materials
and tools of the work, as well as the maintenance of the workmen;

same as before, a very small part of the money which, being forced
abroad by those operations of banking, is employed in purchasing

but the quantity of industry which the whole capital can employ,
is certainly not equal both to the money which purchases, and to

foreign goods for home consumption, is likely to be employed in
purchasing those for their use. The greater part of it will naturally

the materials, tools, and maintenance, which are purchased with
it, but only to one or other of those two values, and to the latter

be destined for the employment of industry, and not for the maintenance of idleness.

more properly than to the former.
When paper is substituted in the room of gold and silver money,

When we compute the quantity of industry which the circulating
capital of any society can employ, we must always have regard to

the quantity of the materials, tools, and maintenance, which the
whole circulating capital can supply, may be increased by the whole

those parts of it only which consist in provisions, materials, and fin-

value of gold and silver which used to be employed in purchasing

239

The Wealth of Nations
them. The whole value of the great wheel of circulation and distribution is added to the goods which are circulated and distributed

the value of the annual produce of land and labour.
An operation of this kind has, within these five-and-twenty or

by means of it. The operation, in some measure, resembles that of
the undertaker of some great work, who, in consequence of some

thirty years, been performed in Scotland, by the erection of new
banking companies in almost every considerable town, and even

improvement in mechanics, takes down his old machinery, and
adds the difference between its price and that of the new to his

in some country villages. The effects of it have been precisely those
above described. The business of the country is almost entirely

circulating capital, to the fund from which he furnishes materials
and wages to his workmen.

carried on by means of the paper of those different banking companies, with which purchases and payments of all kinds are com-

What is the proportion which the circulating money of any country bears to the whole value of the annual produce circulated by

monly made. Silver very seldom appears, except in the change of a
twenty shilling bank note, and gold still seldomer. But though the

means of it, it is perhaps impossible to determine. It has been
computed by different authors at a fifth, at a tenth, at a twentieth,

conduct of all those different companies has not been unexceptionable, and has accordingly required an act of parliament to regu-

and at a thirtieth, part of that value. But how small soever the
proportion which the circulating money may bear to the whole

late it, the country, notwithstanding, has evidently derived great
benefit from their trade. I have heard it asserted, that the trade of

value of the annual produce, as but a part, and frequently but a
small part, of that produce, is ever destined for the maintenance

the city of Glasgow doubled in about fifteen years after the first
erection of the banks there; and that the trade of Scotland has

of industry, it must always bear a very considerable proportion to
that part. When, therefore, by the substitution of paper, the gold

more than quadrupled since the first erection of the two public
banks at Edinburgh; of which the one, called the Bank of Scot-

and silver necessary for circulation is reduced to, perhaps, a fifth
part of the former quantity, if the value of only the greater part of

land, was established by act of parliament in 1695, and the other,
called the Royal Bank, by royal charter in 1727. Whether the trade,

the other four-fifths be added to the funds which are destined for
the maintenance of industry, it must make a very considerable

either of Scotland in general, or of the city of Glasgow in particular, has really increased in so great a proportion, during so short a

addition to the quantity of that industry, and, consequently, to

period, I do not pretend to know. If either of them has increased

240

Adam Smith
in this proportion, it seems to be an effect too great to be accounted for by the sole operation of this cause. That the trade and

probably, does not amount to half a million. But though the circulating gold and silver of Scotland have suffered so great a dimi-

industry of Scotland, however, have increased very considerably
during this period, and that the banks have contributed a good

nution during this period, its real riches and prosperity do not
appear to have suffered any. Its agriculture, manufactures, and

deal to this increase, cannot be doubted.
The value of the silver money which circulated in Scotland be-

trade, on the contrary, the annual produce of its land and labour,
have evidently been augmented.

fore the Union in 1707, and which, immediately after it, was
brought into the Bank of Scotland, in order to be recoined,

It is chiefly by discounting bills of exchange, that is, by advancing money upon them before they are due, that the greater part of

amounted to £411,117: 10: 9 sterling. No account has been got
of the gold coin; but it appears from the ancient accounts of the

banks and bankers issue their promissory notes. They deduct always, upon whatever sum they advance, the legal interest till the

mint of Scotland, that the value of the gold annually coined somewhat exceeded that of the silver. There were a good many people,

bill shall become due. The payment of the bill, when it becomes
due, replaces to the bank the value of what had been advanced,

too, upon this occasion, who, from a diffidence of repayment, did
not bring their silver into the Bank of Scotland; and there was,

together with a clear profit of the interest. The banker, who advances to the merchant whose bill he discounts, not gold and sil-

besides, some English coin, which was not called in. The whole
value of the gold and silver, therefore, which circulated in Scot-

ver, but his own promissory notes, has the advantage of being able
to discount to a greater amount by the whole value of his promis-

land before the Union, cannot be estimated at less than a million
sterling. It seems to have constituted almost the whole circulation

sory notes, which he finds, by experience, are commonly in circulation. He is thereby enabled to make his clear gain of interest on

of that country; for though the circulation of the Bank of Scotland, which had then no rival, was considerable, it seems to have

so much a larger sum.
The commerce of Scotland, which at present is not very great,

made but a very small part of the whole. In the present times, the
whole circulation of Scotland cannot be estimated at less than two

was still more inconsiderable when the two first banking companies
were established; and those companies would have had but little

millions, of which that part which consists in gold and silver, most

trade, had they confined their business to the discounting of bills of

241

The Wealth of Nations
exchange. They invented, therefore, another method of issuing their
promissory notes; by granting what they call cash accounts, that is,

in all payments, and by encouraging all those with whom they
have any influence to do the same. The banks, when their cus-

by giving credit, to the extent of a certain sum (two or three thousand pounds for example), to any individual who could procure

tomers apply to them for money, generally advance it to them in
their own promissory notes. These the merchants pay away to the

two persons of undoubted credit and good landed estate to become
surety for him, that whatever money should be advanced to him,

manufacturers for goods, the manufacturers to the farmers for
materials and provisions, the farmers to their landlords for rent;

within the sum for which the credit had been given, should be repaid upon demand, together with the legal interest. Credits of this

the landlords repay them to the merchants for the conveniencies
and luxuries with which they supply them, and the merchants

kind are, I believe, commonly granted by banks and bankers in all
different parts of the world. But the easy terms upon which the

again return them to the banks, in order to balance their cash
accounts, or to replace what they my have borrowed of them; and

Scotch banking companies accept of repayment are, so far as I know,
peculiar to them, and have perhaps been the principal cause, both

thus almost the whole money business of the country is transacted
by means of them. Hence the great trade of those companies.

of the great trade of those companies,and of the benefit which the
country has received from it.

By means of those cash accounts, every merchant can, without
imprudence, carry on a greater trade than he otherwise could do.

Whoever has a credit of this kind with one of those companies,
and borrows a thousand pounds upon it, for example, may repay

If there are two merchants, one in London and the other in
Edinburgh, who employ equal stocks in the same branch of trade,

this sum piece-meal, by twenty and thirty pounds at a time, the
company discounting a proportionable part of the interest of the

the Edinburgh merchant can, without imprudence, carry on a
greater trade, and give employment to a greater number of people,

great sum, from the day on which each of those small sums is paid
in, till the whole be in this manner repaid. All merchants, there-

than the London merchant. The London merchant must always
keep by him a considerable sum of money, either in his own cof-

fore, and almost all men of business, find it convenient to keep
such cash accounts with them, and are thereby interested to pro-

fers, or in those of his banker, who gives him no interest for it, in
order to answer the demands continually coming upon him for

mote the trade of those companies, by readily receiving their notes

payment of the goods which he purchases upon credit. Let the

242

Adam Smith
ordinary amount of this sum be supposed five hundred pounds;
the value of the goods in his warehouse must always be less, by

benefit which the country has derived from this trade.
The facility of discounting bills of exchange, it may be thought,

five hundred pounds, than it would have been, had he not been
obliged to keep such a sum unemployed. Let us suppose that he

indeed, gives the English merchants a conveniency equivalent to
the cash accounts of the Scotch merchants. But the Scotch mer-

generally disposes of his whole stock upon hand, or of goods to
the value of his whole stock upon hand, once in the year. By being

chants, it must be remembered, can discount their bills of exchange as easily as the English merchants; and have, besides, the

obliged to keep so great a sum unemployed, he must sell in a year
five hundred pounds worth less goods than he might otherwise

additional conveniency of their cash accounts.
The whole paper money of every kind which can easily circulate

have done. His annual profits must be less by all that he could
have made by the sale of five hundred pounds worth more goods;

in any country, never can exceed the value of the gold and silver,
of which it supplies the place, or which (the commerce being sup-

and the number of people employed in preparing his goods for
the market must be less by all those that five hundred pounds

posed the same) would circulate there, if there was no paper money.
If twenty shilling notes, for example, are the lowest paper money

more stock could have employed. The merchant in Edinburgh,
on the other hand, keeps no money unemployed for answering

current in Scotland, the whole of that currency which can easily
circulate there, cannot exceed the sum of gold and silver which

such occasional demands. When they actually come upon him,
he satisfies them from his cash account with the bank, and gradu-

would be necessary for transacting the annual exchanges of twenty
shillings value and upwards usually transacted within that coun-

ally replaces the sum borrowed with the money or paper which
comes in from the occasional sales of his goods. With the same

try. Should the circulating paper at any time exceed that sum, as
the excess could neither be sent abroad nor be employed in the

stock, therefore, he can, without imprudence, have at all times in
his warehouse a larger quantity of goods than the London mer-

circulation of the country, it must immediately return upon the
banks, to be exchanged for gold and silver. Many people would

chant; and can thereby both make a greater profit himself, and
give constant employment to a greater number of industrious

immediately perceive that they had more of this paper than was
necessary for transacting their business at home; and as they could

people who prepare those goods for the market. Hence the great

not send it abroad, they would immediately demand payment for

243

The Wealth of Nations
it from the banks. When this superfluous paper was converted
into gold and silver, they could easily find a use for it, by sending

their quantity. Such a company, therefore, ought to increase the
first article of their expense, not only in proportion to this forced

it abroad; but they could find none while it remained in the shape
of paper. There would immediately, therefore, be a run upon the

increase of their business, but in a much greater proportion.
The coffers of such a company, too, though they ought to be

banks to the whole extent of this superfluous paper, and if they
showed any difficulty or backwardness in payment, to a much

filled much fuller, yet must empty themselves much faster than if
their business was confined within more reasonable bounds, and

greater extent; the alarm which this would occasion necessarily
increasing the run.

must require not only a more violent, but a more constant and
uninterrupted exertion of expense, in order to replenish them,

Over and above the expenses which are common to every branch
of trade, such as the expense of house-rent, the wages of servants,

The coin, too, which is thus continually drawn in such large quantities from their coffers, cannot be employed in the circulation of

clerks, accountants, etc. the expenses peculiar to a bank consist
chiefly in two articles: first, in the expense of keeping at all times

the country. It comes in place of a paper which is over and above
what can be employed in that circulation, and is, therefore, over

in its coffers, for answering the occasional demands of the holders
of its notes, a large sum of money, of which it loses the interest;

and above what can be employed in it too. But as that coin will
not be allowed to lie idle, it must, in one shape or another, be sent

and, secondly, in the expense of replenishing those coffers as fast
as they are emptied by answering such occasional demands.

abroad, in order to find that profitable employment which it cannot find at home; and this continual exportation of gold and sil-

A banking company which issues more paper than can be employed in the circulation of the country, and of which the excess is

ver, by enhancing the difficulty, must necessarily enhance still farther the expense of the bank, in finding new gold and silver in

continually returning upon them for payment, ought to increase
the quantity of gold and silver which they keep at all times in their

order to replenish those coffers, which empty themselves so very
rapidly. Such a company, therefore, must in proportion to this

coffers, not only in proportion to this excessive increase of their
circulation, but in a much greater proportion; their notes return-

forced increase of their business, increase the second article of their
expense still more than the first.

ing upon them much faster than in proportion to the excess of

Let us suppose that all the paper of a particular bank, which the

244

Adam Smith
circulation of the country can easily absorb and employ, amounts
exactly to forty thousand pounds, and that, for answering occa-

coin gold to the extent of between eight hundred thousand pounds
and a million a-year; or, at an average, about eight hundred and

sional demands, this bank is obliged to keep at all times in its
coffers ten thousand pounds in gold and silver. Should this bank

fifty thousand pounds. For this great coinage, the bank (inconsequence of the worn and degraded state into which the gold coin

attempt to circulate forty-four thousand pounds, the four thousand pounds which are over and above what the circulation can

had fallen a few years ago) was frequently obliged to purchase
gold bullion at the high price of four pounds an ounce, which it

easily absorb and employ, will return upon it almost as fast as they
are issued. For answering occasional demands, therefore, this bank

soon after issued in coin at £3:17:10 1/2 an ounce, losing in this
manner between two and a half and three per cent. upon the coin-

ought to keep at all times in its coffers, not eleven thousand pounds
only, but fourteen thousand pounds. It will thus gain nothing by

age of so very large a sum. Though the bank, therefore, paid no
seignorage, though the government was properly at the expense of

the interest of the four thousand pounds excessive circulation; and
it will lose the whole expense of continually collecting four thou-

this coinage, this liberality of government did not prevent altogether the expense of the bank.

sand pounds in gold and silver, which will be continually going
out of its coffers as fast as they are brought into them.

The Scotch banks, in consequence of an excess of the same kind,
were all obliged to employ constantly agents at London to collect

Had every particular banking company always understood and
attended to its own particular interest, the circulation never could

money for them, at an expense which was seldom below one and
a half or two per cent. This money was sent down by the waggon,

have been overstocked with paper money. But every particular
banking company has not always understood or attended to its

and insured by the carriers at an additional expense of three quarters per cent. or fifteen shillings on the hundred pounds. Those

own particular interest, and the circulation has frequently been
overstocked with paper money.

agents were not always able to replenish the coffers of their employers so fast as they were emptied. In this case, the resource of

By issuing too great a quantity of paper, of which the excess was
continually returning, in order to be exchanged for gold and sil-

the banks was, to draw upon their correspondents in London bills
of exchange, to the extent of the sum which they wanted. When

ver, the Bank of England was for many years together obliged to

those correspondents afterwards drew upon them for the payment

245

The Wealth of Nations
of this sum, together with the interest and commission, some of
those banks, from the distress into which their excessive circula-

were of more value abroad, or when melted down into bullion at
home. The Bank of England, notwithstanding their great annual

tion had thrown them, had sometimes no other means of satisfying this draught, but by drawing a second set of bills, either upon

coinage, found, to their astonishment, that there was every year
the same scarcity of coin as there had been the year before; and

the same, or upon some other correspondents in London; and the
same sum, or rather bills for the same sum, would in this manner

that, notwithstanding the great quantity of good and new coin
which was every year issued from the bank, the state of the coin,

make sometimes more than two or three journeys; the debtor bank
paying always the interest and commission upon the whole accu-

instead of growing better and better, became every year worse and
worse. Every year they found themselves under the necessity of

mulated sum. Even those Scotch banks which never distinguished
themselves by their extreme imprudence, were sometimes obliged

coining nearly the same quantity of gold as they had coined the
year before; and from the continual rise in the price of gold bul-

to employ this ruinous resource.
The gold coin which was paid out, either by the Bank of En-

lion, in consequence of the continual wearing and clipping of the
coin, the expense of this great annual coinage became, every year,

gland or by the Scotch banks, in exchange for that part of their
paper which was over and above what could be employed in the

greater and greater. The Bank of England, it is to be observed, by
supplying its own coffers with coin, is indirectly obliged to supply

circulation of the country, being likewise over and above what
could be employed in that circulation, was sometimes sent abroad

the whole kingdom, into which coin is continually flowing from
those coffers in a great variety of ways. Whatever coin, therefore,

in the shape of coin, sometimes melted down and sent abroad in
the shape of bullion, and sometimes melted down and sold to the

was wanted to support this excessive circulation both of Scotch
and English paper money, whatever vacuities this excessive circu-

Bank of England at the high price of four pounds an ounce. It was
the newest, the heaviest, and the best pieces only, which were care-

lation occasioned in the necessary coin of the kingdom, the Bank
of England was obliged to supply them. The Scotch banks, no

fully picked out of the whole coin, and either sent abroad or melted
down. At home, and while they remained in the shape of coin,

doubt, paid all of them very dearly for their own imprudence and
inattention: but the Bank of England paid very dearly, not only

those heavy pieces were of no more value than the light; but they

for its own imprudence, but for the much greater imprudence of

246

Adam Smith
almost all the Scotch banks.
The over-trading of some bold projectors in both parts of the

though a stream is continually running out, yet another is continually running in, fully equal to that which runs out; so that,

united kingdom, was the original cause of this excessive circulation of paper money.

without any further care or attention, the pond keeps always
equally, or very near equally full. Little or no expense can ever be

What a bank can with propriety advance to a merchant or undertaker of any kind, is not either the whole capital with which he

necessary for replenishing the coffers of such a bank.
A merchant, without over-trading, may frequently have occa-

trades, or even any considerable part of that capital; but that part
of it only which he would otherwise be obliged to keep by him

sion for a sum of ready money, even when he has no bills to discount. When a bank, besides discounting his bills, advances him

unemployed and in ready money, for answering occasional demands. If the paper money which the bank advances never ex-

likewise, upon such occasions, such sums upon his cash account,
and accepts of a piece-meal repayment, as the money comes in

ceeds this value, it can never exceed the value of the gold and silver
which would necessarily circulate in the country if there was no

from the occasional sale of his goods, upon the easy terms of the
banking companies of Scotland; it dispenses him entirely from

paper money; it can never exceed the quantity which the circulation of the country can easily absorb and employ.

the necessity of keeping any part of his stock by him unemployed
and in ready money for answering occasional demands. When

When a bank discounts to a merchant a real bill of exchange,
drawn by a real creditor upon a real debtor, and which, as soon as

such demands actually come upon him, he can answer them sufficiently from his cash account. The bank, however, in dealing

it becomes due, is really paid by that debtor; it only advances to
him a part of the value which he would otherwise be obliged to

with such customers, ought to observe with great attention,
whether, in the course of some short period (of four, five, six, or

keep by him unemployed and in ready money, for answering occasional demands. The payment of the bill, when it becomes due,

eight months, for example), the sum of the repayments which it
commonly receives from them, is, or is not, fully equal to that of

replaces to the bank the value of what it had advanced, together
with the interest. The coffers of the bank, so far as its dealings are

the advances which it commonly makes to them. If, within the
course of such short periods, the sum of the repayments from

confined to such customers, resemble a water-pond, from which,

certain customers is, upon most occasions, fully equal to that of

247

The Wealth of Nations
the advances, it may safely continue to deal with such customers.
Though the stream which is in this case continually running out

First, by this attention they were enabled to make some tolerable judgment concerning the thriving or declining circumstances

from its coffers may be very large, that which is continually running into them must be at least equally large, so that, without any

of their debtors, without being obliged to look out for any other
evidence besides what their own books afforded them; men being,

further care or attention, those coffers are likely to be always equally
or very near equally full, and scarce ever to require any extraordi-

for the most part, either regular or irregular in their repayments,
according as their circumstances are either thriving or declining.

nary expense to replenish them. If, on the contrary, the sum of the
repayments from certain other customers, falls commonly very

A private man who lends out his money to perhaps half a dozen or
a dozen of debtors, may, either by himself or his agents, observe

much short of the advances which it makes to them, it cannot
with any safety continue to deal with such customers, at least if

and inquire both constantly and carefully into the conduct and
situation of each of them. But a banking company, which lends

they continue to deal with it in this manner. The stream which is
in this case continually running out from its coffers, is necessarily

money to perhaps five hundred different people, and of which the
attention is continually occupied by objects of a very different

much larger than that which is continually running in; so that,
unless they are replenished by some great and continual effort of

kind, can have no regular information concerning the conduct
and circumstances of the greater part of its debtors, beyond what

expense, those coffers must soon be exhausted altogether.
The banking companies of Scotland, accordingly, were for a

its own books afford it. In requiring frequent and regular repayments from all their customers, the banking companies of Scot-

long time very careful to require frequent and regular repayments
from all their customers, and did not care to deal with any person,

land had probably this advantage in view.
Secondly, by this attention they secured themselves from the

whatever might be his fortune or credit, who did not make, what
they called, frequent and regular operations with them. By this

possibility of issuing more paper money than what the circulation
of the country could easily absorb and employ. When they ob-

attention, besides saving almost entirely the extraordinary expense
of replenishing their coffers, they gained two other very consider-

served, that within moderate periods of time, the repayments of a
particular customer were, upon most occasions, fully equal to the

able advantages.

advances which they had made to him, they might be assured that

248

Adam Smith
the paper money which they had advanced to him had not, at any
time, exceeded the quantity of gold and silver which he would

exceeding the quantity of gold and silver which, had there been
no such advances, he would have been obliged to keep by him for

otherwise have been obliged to keep by him for answering occasional demands; and that, consequently, the paper money, which

answering occasional demands, might soon come to exceed the
whole quantity of gold and silver which ( the commerce being

they had circulated by his means, had not at any time exceeded
the quantity of gold and silver which would have circulated in the

supposed the same ) would have circulated in the country, had
there been no paper money; and, consequently, to exceed the quan-

country, had there been no paper money. The frequency, regularity, and amount of his repayments, would sufficiently demonstrate

tity which the circulation of the country could easily absorb and
employ; and the excess of this paper money would immediately

that the amount of their advances had at no time exceeded that
part of his capital which he would otherwise have been obliged to

have returned upon the bank, in order to be exchanged for gold
and silver. This second advantage, though equally real, was not,

keep by him unemployed, and in ready money, for answering occasional demands; that is, for the purpose of keeping the rest of

perhaps, so well understood by all the different banking companies in Scotland as the first.

his capital in constant employment. It is this part of his capital
only which, within moderate periods of time, is continually re-

When, partly by the conveniency of discounting bills, and partly
by that of cash accounts, the creditable traders of any country can

turning to every dealer in the shape of money, whether paper or
coin, and continually going from him in the same shape. If the

be dispensed from the necessity of keeping any part of their stock
by them unemployed, and in ready money, for answering occa-

advances of the bank had commonly exceeded this part of his
capital, the ordinary amount of his repayments could not, within

sional demands, they can reasonably expect no farther assistance
from hanks and bankers, who, when they have gone thus far, can-

moderate periods of time, have equalled the ordinary amount of
its advances. The stream which, by means of his dealings, was

not, consistently with their own interest and safety, go farther. A
bank cannot, consistently with its own interest, advance to a trader

continually running into the coffers of the bank, could not have
been equal to the stream which, by means of the same dealings

the whole, or even the greater part of the circulating capital with
which he trades; because, though that capital is continually re-

was continually running out. The advances of the bank paper, by

turning to him in the shape of money, and going from him in the

249

The Wealth of Nations
same shape, yet the whole of the returns is too distant from the
whole of the outgoings, and the sum of his repayments could not

the capital of those creditors; or to render it extremely improbable
that those creditors should incur any loss, even though the success

equal the sum of his advances within such moderate periods of
time as suit the conveniency of a bank. Still less could a bank

of the project should fall very much short of the expectation of the
projectors. Even with this precaution, too, the money which is bor-

afford to advance him any considerable part of his fixed capital; of
the capital which the undertaker of an iron forge, for example,

rowed, and which it is meant should not be repaid till after a period
of several years, ought not to be borrowed of a bank, but ought to

employs in erecting his forge and smelting-houses, his work-houses,
and warehouses, the dwelling-houses of his workmen, etc.; of the

be borrowed upon bond or mortgage, of such private people as
propose to live upon the interest of their money, without taking the

capital which the undertaker of a mine employs in sinking his
shafts, in erecting engines for drawing out the water, in making

trouble themselves to employ the capital, and who are, upon that
account, willing to lend that capital to such people of good credit as

roads and waggon-ways, etc.; of the capital which the person who
undertakes to improve land employs in clearing, draining, inclos-

are likely to keep it for several years. A bank, indeed, which lends its
money without the expense of stamped paper, or of attorneys’ fees

ing, manuring, and ploughing waste and uncultivated fields; in
building farmhouses, with all their necessary appendages of stables,

for drawing bonds and mortgages, and which accepts of repayment
upon the easy terms of the banking companies of Scotland, would,

granaries, etc. The returns of the fixed capital are, in almost all
cases, much slower than those of the circulating capital: and such

no doubt, be a very convenient creditor to such traders and undertakers. But such traders and undertakers would surely be most in-

expenses, even when laid out with the greatest prudence and judgment, very seldom return to the undertaker till after a period of

convenient debtors to such a bank.
It is now more than five and twenty years since the paper money

many years, a period by far too distant to suit the conveniency of
a bank. Traders and other undertakers may, no doubt with great

issued by the different banking companies of Scotland was fully
equal, or rather was somewhat more than fully equal, to what the

propriety, carry on a very considerable part of their projects with
borrowed money. In justice to their creditors, however, their own

circulation of the country could easily absorb and employ. Those
companies, therefore, had so long ago given all the assistance to

capital ought in this case to be sufficient to insure, if I may say so,

the traders and other undertakers of Scotland which it is possible

250

Adam Smith
for banks and bankers, consistently with their own interest, to
give. They had even done somewhat more. They had over-traded

done. This expedient was no other than the well known shift of
drawing and redrawing; the shift to which unfortunate traders

a little, and had brought upon themselves that loss, or at least that
diminution of profit, which, in this particular business, never fails

have sometimes recourse, when they are upon the brink of bankruptcy. The practice of raising money in this manner had been

to attend the smallest degree of over-trading. Those traders and
other undertakers, having got so much assistance from banks and

long known in England; and, during the course of the late war,
when the high profits of trade afforded a great temptation to over-

bankers, wished to get still more. The banks, they seem to have
thought, could extend their credits to whatever sum might be

trading, is said to have been carried on to a very great extent.
From England it was brought into Scotland, where, in proportion

wanted, without incurring any other expense besides that of a few
reams of paper. They complained of the contracted views and das-

to the very limited commerce, and to the very moderate capital of
the country, it was soon carried on to a much greater extent than

tardly spirit of the directors of those banks, which did not, they
said, extend their credits in proportion to the extension of the

it ever had been in England.
The practice of drawing and redrawing is so well known to all

trade of the country; meaning, no doubt, by the extension of that
trade, the extension of their own projects beyond what they could

men of business, that it may, perhaps, be thought unnecessary to
give any account of it. But as this book may come into the hands

carry on either with their own capital, or with what they had credit
to borrow of private people in the usual way of bond or mortgage.

of many people who are not men of business, and as the effects of
this practice upon the banking trade are not, perhaps, generally

The banks, they seem to have thought, were in honour bound to
supply the deficiency, and to provide them with all the capital

understood, even by men of business themselves, I shall endeavour to explain it as distinctly as I can.

which they wanted to trade with. The banks, however, were of a
different opinion; and upon their refusing to extend their credits,

The customs of merchants, which were established when the
barbarous laws of Europe did not enforce the performance of their

some of those traders had recourse to an expedient which, for a
time, served their purpose, though at a much greater expense, yet

contracts, and which, during the course of the two last centuries,
have been adopted into the laws of all European nations, have

as effectually as the utmost extension of bank credits could have

given such extraordinary privileges to bills of exchange, that money

251

The Wealth of Nations
is more readily advanced upon them than upon any other species
of obligation; especially when they are made payable within so

The trader A in Edinburgh, we shall suppose, draws a bill upon
B in London, payable two months after date. In reality B in Lon-

short a period as two or three months after their date. If, when the
bill becomes due, the acceptor does not pay it as soon as it is

don owes nothing to A in Edinburgh; but he agrees to accept of A
‘s bill, upon condition, that before the term of payment he shall

presented, he becomes from that moment a bankrupt. The bill is
protested, and returns upon the drawer, who, if he does not im-

redraw upon A in Edinburgh for the same sum, together with the
interest and a commission, another bill, payable likewise two

mediately pay it, becomes likewise a bankrupt. If, before it came
to the person who presents it to the acceptor for payment, it had

months after date. B accordingly, before the expiration of the first
two months, redraws this bill upon A in Edinburgh; who, again

passed through the hands of several other persons, who had successively advanced to one another the contents of it, either in money

before the expiration of the second two months, draws a second
bill upon B in London, payable likewise two months after date;

or goods, and who, to express that each of them had in his turn
received those contents, had all of them in their order indorsed,

and before the expiration of the third two months, B in London
redraws upon A in Edinburgh another bill payable also two months

that is, written their names upon the back of the bill; each indorser becomes in his turn liable to the owner of the bill for those

after date. This practice has sometimes gone on, not only for several months, but for several years together, the bill always return-

contents, and, if he fails to pay, he becomes too, from that moment, a bankrupt. Though the drawer, acceptor, and indorsers of

ing upon A in Edinburgh with the accumulated interest and commission of all the former bills. The interest was five per cent. in

the bill, should all of them be persons of doubtful credit; yet, still
the shortness of the date gives some security to the owner of the

the year, and the commission was never less than one half per
cent. on each draught. This commission being repeated more than

bill. Though all of them may be very likely to become bankrupts,
it is a chance if they all become so in so short a time. The house is

six times in the year, whatever money A might raise by this expedient might necessarily have cost him something more than eight

crazy, says a weary traveller to himself, and will not stand very
long; but it is a chance if it falls to-night, and I will venture, there-

per cent. in the year and sometimes a great deal more, when either
the price of the commission happened to rise, or when he was

fore, to sleep in it to-night.

obliged to pay compound interest upon the interest and commis-

252

Adam Smith
sion of former bills. This practice was called raising money by
circulation.

at sight to the order of B, to whom he sent them by the post.
Towards the end of the late war, the exchange between Edinburgh

In a country where the ordinary profits of stock, in the greater
part of mercantile projects, are supposed to run between six and

and London was frequently three per cent. against Edinburgh,
and those bills at sight must frequently have cost A that premium.

ten per cent. it must have been a very fortunate speculation, of
which the returns could not only repay the enormous expense at

This transaction, therefore, being repeated at least four times in
the year, and being loaded with a commission of at least one half

which the money was thus borrowed for carrying it on, but afford, besides, a good surplus profit to the projector. Many vast

per cent. upon each repetition, must at that period have cost A, at
least, fourteen per cent. in the year. At other times A would enable

and extensive projects, however, were undertaken, and for several
years carried on, without any other fund to support them besides

to discharge the first bill of exchange, by drawing, a few days before it became due, a second bill at two months date, not upon B,

what was raised at this enormous expense. The projectors, no doubt,
had in their golden dreams the most distinct vision of this great

but upon some third person, C, for example, in London. This
other bill was made payable to the order of B, who, upon its being

profit. Upon their awakening, however, either at the end of their
projects, or when they were no longer able to carry them on, they

accepted by C, discounted it with some banker in London; and A
enabled C to discharge it, by drawing, a few day’s before it became

very seldom, I believe, had the good fortune to find it.
{The method described in the text was by no means either the

due, a third bill likewise at two months date, sometimes upon his
first correspondent B, and sometimes upon some fourth or fifth

most common or the most expensive one in which those adventurers sometimes raised money by circulation. It frequently hap-

person, D or E, for example. This third bill was made payable to
the order of C, who, as soon as it was accepted, discounted it in

pened, that A in Edinburgh would enable B in London to pay the
first bill of exchange, by drawing, a few days before it became due,

the same manner with some banker in London. Such operations
being repeated at least six times in the year, and being loaded with

a second bill at three months date upon the same B in London.
This bill, being payable to his own order, A sold in Edinburgh at

a commission of at least one half per cent. upon each repetition,
together with the legal interest of five per cent. this method of

par; and with its contents purchased bills upon London, payable

raising money, in the same manner as that described in the text,

253

The Wealth of Nations
must have cost A something more than eight per cent. By saving,
however, the exchange between Edinburgh and London, it was

The stream which, by means of those circulating bills of exchange,
had once been made to run out from the coffers of the banks, was

less expensive than that mentioned in the foregoing part of this
note; but then it required an established credit with more houses

never replaced by any stream which really ran into them.
The paper which was issued upon those circulating bills of ex-

than one in London, an advantage which many of these adventurers could not always find it easy to procure.}

change amounted, upon many occasions, to the whole fund destined for carrying on some vast and extensive project of agricul-

The bills which A in Edinburgh drew upon B in London, he
regularly discounted two months before they were due, with some

ture, commerce, or manufactures; and not merely to that part of
it which, had there been no paper money, the projector would

bank or banker in Edinburgh; and the bills which B in London
redrew upon A in Edinburgh, he as regularly discounted, either

have been obliged to keep by him unemployed, and in ready money,
for answering occasional demands. The greater part of this paper

with the Bank of England, or with some other banker in London.
Whatever was advanced upon such circulating bills was in

was, consequently, over and above the value of the gold and silver
which would have circulated in the country, had there been no

Edinburgh advanced in the paper of the Scotch banks; and in
London, when they were discounted at the Bank of England in

paper money. It was over and above, therefore, what the circulation of the country could easily absorb and employ, and upon that

the paper of that bank. Though the bills upon which this paper
had been advanced were all of them repaid in their turn as soon as

account, immediately returned upon the banks, in order to be
exchanged for gold and silver, which they were to find as they

they became due, yet the value which had been really advanced
upon the first bill was never really returned to the banks which

could. It was a capital which those projectors had very artfully
contrived to draw from those banks, not only without their knowl-

advanced it; because, before each bill became due, another bill
was always drawn to somewhat a greater amount than the bill

edge or deliberate consent, but for some time, perhaps, without
their having the most distant suspicion that they had really ad-

which was soon to be paid: and the discounting of this other bill
was essentially necessary towards the payment of that which was

vanced it.
When two people, who are continually drawing and redrawing

soon to be due. This payment, therefore, was altogether fictitious.

upon one another, discount their bills always with the same banker,

254

Adam Smith
he must immediately discover what they are about, and see clearly
that they are trading, not with any capital of their own, but with

by degrees to have recourse, either to other bankers, or to other
methods of raising money: so as that he himself might, as soon as

the capital which he advances to them. But this discovery is not
altogether so easy when they discount their bills sometimes with

possible, get out of the circle. The difficulties, accordingly, which
the Bank of England, which the principal bankers in London, and

one banker, and sometimes with another, and when the two same
persons do not constantly draw and redraw upon one another,

which even the more prudent Scotch banks began, after a certain
time, and when all of them had already gone too far, to make

but occasionally run the round of a great circle of projectors, who
find it for their interest to assist one another in this method of

about discounting, not only alarmed, but enraged, in the highest
degree, those projectors. Their own distress, of which this prudent

raising money and to render it, upon that account, as difficult as
possible to distinguish between a real and a fictitious bill of ex-

and necessary reserve of the banks was, no doubt, the immediate
occasion, they called the distress of the country; and this distress

change, between a bill drawn by a real creditor upon a real debtor,
and a bill for which there was properly no real creditor but the

of the country, they said, was altogether owing to the ignorance,
pusillanimity, and bad conduct of the banks, which did not give a

bank which discounted it, nor any real debtor but the projector
who made use of the money. When a banker had even made this

sufficiently liberal aid to the spirited undertakings of those who
exerted themselves in order to beautify, improve, and enrich the

discovery, he might sometimes make it too late, and might find
that he had already discounted the bills of those projectors to so

country. It was the duty of the banks, they seemed to think, to
lend for as long a time, and to as great an extent, as they might

great an extent, that, by refusing to discount any more, he would
necessarily make them all bankrupts; and thus by ruining them,

wish to borrow. The banks, however, by refusing in this manner
to give more credit to those to whom they had already given a

might perhaps ruin himself. For his own interest and safety, therefore, he might find it necessary, in this very perilous situation, to

great deal too much, took the only method by which it was now
possible to save either their own credit, or the public credit of the

go on for some time, endeavouring, however, to withdraw gradually, and, upon that account, making every day greater and greater

country.
In the midst of this clamour and distress, a new bank was estab-

difficulties about discounting, in order to force these projectors

lished in Scotland, for the express purpose of relieving the distress

255

The Wealth of Nations
of the country. The design was generous; but the execution was
imprudent, and the nature and causes of the distress which it meant

their first instalment, opened a cash-account with the bank; and
the directors, thinking themselves obliged to treat their own pro-

to relieve, were not, perhaps, well understood. This bank was more
liberal than any other had ever been, both in granting cash-ac-

prietors with the same liberality with which they treated all other
men, allowed many of them to borrow upon this cash-account

counts, and in discounting bills of exchange. With regard to the
latter, it seems to have made scarce any distinction between real

what they paid in upon all their subsequent instalments. Such
payments, therefore, only put into one coffer what had the mo-

and circulating bills, but to have discounted all equally. It was the
avowed principle of this bank to advance upon any reasonable

ment before been taken out of another. But had the coffers of this
bank been filled ever so well, its excessive circulation must have

security, the whole capital which was to be employed in those
improvements of which the returns are the most slow and distant,

emptied them faster than they could have been replenished by any
other expedient but the ruinous one of drawing upon London;

such as the improvements of land. To promote such improvements
was even said to be the chief of the public-spirited purposes for

and when the bill became due, paying it, together with interest
and commission, by another draught upon the same place. Its

which it was instituted. By its liberality in granting cash-accounts,
and in discounting bills of exchange, it, no doubt, issued great

coffers having been filled so very ill, it is said to have been driven
to this resource within a very few months after it began to do

quantities of its bank notes. But those bank notes being, the greater
part of them, over and above what the circulation of the country

business. The estates of the proprietors of this bank were worth
several millions, and, by their subscription to the original bond or

could easily absorb and employ, returned upon it, in order to be
exchanged for gold and silver, as fast as they were issued. Its cof-

contract of the bank, were really pledged for answering all its engagements. By means of the great credit which so great a pledge

fers were never well filled. The capital which had been subscribed
to this bank, at two different subscriptions, amounted to one hun-

necessarily gave it, it was, notwithstanding its too liberal conduct,
enabled to carry on business for more than two years. When it was

dred and sixty thousand pounds, of which eighty per cent. only
was paid up. This sum ought to have been paid in at several differ-

obliged to stop, it had in the circulation about two hundred thousand pounds in bank notes. In order to support the circulation of

ent instalments. A great part of the proprietors, when they paid in

those notes, which were continually returning upon it as fast as

256

Adam Smith
they were issued, it had been constantly in the practice of drawing
bills of exchange upon London, of which the number and value

gave some temporary relief to those projectors, and enabled them
to carry on their projects for about two years longer than they

were continually increasing, and, when it stopt, amounted to upwards of six hundred thousand pounds. This bank, therefore, had,

could otherwise have done. But it thereby only enabled them to
get so much deeper into debt; so that, when ruin came, it fell so

in little more than the course of two years, advanced to different
people upwards of eight hundred thousand pounds at five per

much the heavier both upon them and upon their creditors. The
operations of this bank, therefore, instead of relieving, in reality

cent. Upon the two hundred thousand pounds which it circulated
in bank notes, this five per cent. might perhaps be considered as a

aggravated in the long-run the distress which those projectors had
brought both upon themselves and upon their country. It would

clear gain, without any other deduction besides the expense of
management. But upon upwards of six hundred thousand pounds,

have been much better for themselves, their creditors, and their country, had the greater part of them been obliged to stop two years

for which it was continually drawing bills of exchange upon London, it was paying, in the way of interest and commission, up-

sooner than they actually did. The temporary relief, however, which
this bank afforded to those projectors, proved a real and permanent

wards of eight per cent. and was consequently losing more than
three per cent. upon more than three fourths of all its dealings.

relief to the other Scotch banks. All the dealers in circulating bills of
exchange, which those other banks had become so backward in dis-

The operations of this bank seem to have produced effects quite
opposite to those which were intended by the particular persons

counting, had recourse to this new bank, where they were received
with open arms. Those other banks, therefore, were enabled to get

who planned and directed it. They seem to have intended to support the spirited undertakings, for as such they considered them,

very easily out of that fatal circle, from which they could not otherwise have disengaged themselves without incurring a considerable

which were at that time carrying on in different parts of the country; and, at the same time, by drawing the whole banking business

loss, and perhaps, too, even some degree of discredit.
In the long-run, therefore, the operations of this bank increased

to themselves, to supplant all the other Scotch banks, particularly
those established at Edinburgh, whose backwardness in discount-

the real distress of the country, which it meant to relieve; and
effectually relieved, from a very great distress, those rivals whom it

ing bills of exchange had given some offence. This bank, no doubt,

meant to supplant.

257

The Wealth of Nations
At the first setting out of this bank, it was the opinion of some
people, that how fast soever its coffers might be emptied, it might

with those people, and of drawing the proper bond or assignment, must have fallen upon them, and have been so much clear

easily replenish them, by raising money upon the securities of those
to whom it had advanced its paper. Experience, I believe, soon

loss upon the balance of their accounts. The project of replenishing their coffers in this manner may be compared to that of a man

convinced them that this method of raising money was by much
too slow to answer their purpose; and that coffers which originally

who had a water-pond from which a stream was continually running out, and into which no stream was continually running, but

were so ill filled, and which emptied themselves so very fast, could
be replenished by no other expedient but the ruinous one of draw-

who proposed to keep it always equally full, by employing a number of people to go continually with buckets to a well at some

ing bills upon London, and when they became due, paying them
by other draughts on the same place, with accumulated interest

miles distance, in order to bring water to replenish it.
But though this operation had proved not only practicable, but

and commission. But though they had been able by this method
to raise money as fast as they wanted it, yet, instead of making a

profitable to the bank, as a mercantile company; yet the country
could have derived no benefit front it, but, on the contrary, must

profit, they must have suffered a loss of every such operation; so
that in the long-run they must have ruined themselves as a mer-

have suffered a very considerable loss by it. This operation could
not augment, in the smallest degree, the quantity of money to be

cantile company, though perhaps not so soon as by the more expensive practice of drawing and redrawing. They could still have

lent. It could only have erected this bank into a sort of general
loan office for the whole country. Those who wanted to borrow

made nothing by the interest of the paper, which, being over and
above what the circulation of the country could absorb and em-

must have applied to this bank, instead of applying to the private
persons who had lent it their money. But a bank which lends

ploy, returned upon them in order to be exchanged for gold and
silver, as fast as they issued it; and for the payment of which they

money, perhaps to five hundred different people, the greater part
of whom its directors can know very little about, is not likely to be

were themselves continually obliged to borrow money. On the
contrary, the whole expense of this borrowing, of employing agents

more judicious in the choice of its debtors than a private person
who lends out his money among a few people whom he knows,

to look out for people who had money to lend, of negotiating

and in whose sober and frugal conduct he thinks he has good

258

Adam Smith
reason to confide. The debtors of such a bank as that whose conduct I have been giving some account of were likely, the greater

employ it, was the opinion of the famous Mr Law. By establishing
a bank of a particular kind, which he seems to have imagined

part of them, to be chimerical projectors, the drawers and redrawers
of circulating bills of exchange, who would employ the money in

might issue paper to the amount of the whole value of all the
lands in the country, he proposed to remedy this want of money.

extravagant undertakings, which, with all the assistance that could
be given them, they would probably never be able to complete,

The parliament of Scotland, when he first proposed his project,
did not think proper to adopt it. It was afterwards adopted, with

and which, if they should be completed, would never repay the
expense which they had really cost, would never afford a fund

some variations, by the Duke of Orleans, at that time regent of
France. The idea of the possibility of multiplying paper money to

capable of maintaining a quantity of labour equal to that which
had been employed about them. The sober and frugal debtors of

almost any extent was the real foundation of what is called the
Mississippi scheme, the most extravagant project, both of bank-

private persons, on the contrary, would be more likely to employ
the money borrowed in sober undertakings which were propor-

ing and stock-jobbing, that perhaps the world ever saw. The different operations of this scheme are explained so fully, so clearly,

tioned to their capitals, and which, though they might have less of
the grand and the marvellous, would have more of the solid and

and with so much order and distinctness, by Mr Du Verney, in his
Examination of the Political Reflections upon commerce and fi-

the profitable; which would repay with a large profit whatever
had been laid out upon them, and which would thus afford a

nances of Mr Du Tot, that I shall not give any account of them.
The principles upon which it was founded are explained by Mr

fund capable of maintaining a much greater quantity of labour
than that which had been employed about them. The success of

Law himself, in a discourse concerning money and trade, which
he published in Scotland when he first proposed his project. The

this operation, therefore, without increasing in the smallest degree the capital of the country, would only have transferred a great

splendid but visionary ideas which are set forth in that and some
other works upon the same principles, still continue to make an

part of it from prudent and profitable to imprudent and unprofitable undertakings.

impression upon many people, and have, perhaps, in part, contributed to that excess of banking, which has of late been com-

That the industry of Scotland languished for want of money to

plained of, both in Scotland and in other places.

259

The Wealth of Nations
The Bank of England is the greatest bank of circulation in Europe. It was incorporated, in pursuance of an act of parliament, by

therefore, the credit of government was as good as that of private
persons, since it could borrow at six per cent. interest, the com-

a charter under the great seal, dated the 27th of July 1694. It at
that time advanced to government the sum of £1,200,000 for an

mon legal and market rate of those times. In pursuance of the
same act, the bank cancelled exchequer bills to the amount of £

annuity of £100,000, or for £ 96,000 a-year, interest at the rate of
eight per cent. and £4,000 year for the expense of management.

1,775,027: 17s: 10½d. at six per cent. interest, and was at the
same time allowed to take in subscriptions for doubling its capi-

The credit of the new government, established by the Revolution,
we may believe, must have been very low, when it was obliged to

tal. In 1703, therefore, the capital of the bank amounted to
£4,402,343; and it had advanced to government the sum of

borrow at so high an interest.
In 1697, the bank was allowed to enlarge its capital stock, by an

£3,375,027:17:10½d.
By a call of fifteen per cent. in 1709, there was paid in, and

ingraftment of £1,001,171:10s. Its whole capital stock, therefore,
amounted at this time to £2,201,171: 10s. This ingraftment is

made stock, £ 656,204:1:9d.; and by another of ten per cent. in
1710, £501,448:12:11d. In consequence of those two calls, there-

said to have been for the support of public credit. In 1696, tallies
had been at forty, and fifty, and sixty, per cent. discount, and bank

fore, the bank capital amounted to £ 5,559,995:14:8d.
In pursuance of the 3rd George I. c.8, the bank delivered up

notes at twenty per cent. {James Postlethwaite’s History of the
Public Revenue, p.301.} During the great re-coinage of the silver,

two millions of exchequer Bills to be cancelled. It had at this time,
therefore, advanced to government £5,375,027:17 10d. In pursu-

which was going on at this time, the bank had thought proper to
discontinue the payment of its notes, which necessarily occasioned

ance of the 8th George I. c.21, the bank purchased of the Southsea company, stock to the amount of £4,000,000: and in 1722, in

their discredit.
In pursuance of the 7th Anne, c. 7, the bank advanced and paid

consequence of the subscriptions which it had taken in for enabling it to make this purchase, its capital stock was increased by £

into the exchequer the sum of £400,000; making in all the sum of
£1,600,000, which it had advanced upon its original annuity of

3,400,000. At this time, therefore, the bank had advanced to the
public £ 9,375,027 17s. 10½d.; and its capital stock amounted

£96,000 interest, and £4,000 for expense of management. In 1708,

only to £ 8,959,995:14:8d. It was upon this occasion that the

260

Adam Smith
sum which the bank had advanced to the public, and for which it
received interest, began first to exceed its capital stock, or the sum

consist of more than six members. It acts, not only as an ordinary
bank, but as a great engine of state. It receives and pays the greater

for which it paid a dividend to the proprietors of bank stock; or,
in other words, that the bank began to have an undivided capital,

part of the annuities which are due to the creditors of the public;
it circulates exchequer bills; and it advances to government the

over and above its divided one. It has continued to have an undivided capital of the same kind ever since. In 1746, the bank had,

annual amount of the land and malt taxes, which are frequently
not paid up till some years thereafter. In these different opera-

upon different occasions, advanced to the public £11,686,800,
and its divided capital had been raised by different calls and sub-

tions, its duty to the public may sometimes have obliged it, without any fault of its directors, to overstock the circulation with

scriptions to £ 10,780,000. The state of those two sums has continued to be the same ever since. In pursuance of the 4th of George

paper money. It likewise discounts merchants’ bills, and has, upon
several different occasions, supported the credit of the principal

III. c.25, the bank agreed to pay to government for the renewal of
its charter £110,000, without interest or re-payment. This sum,

houses, not only of England, but of Hamburgh and Holland. Upon
one occasion, in 1763, it is said to have advanced for this purpose,

therefore did not increase either of those two other sums.
The dividend of the bank has varied according to the variations

in one week, about £1,600,000, a great part of it in bullion. I do
not, however, pretend to warrant either the greatness of the sum,

in the rate of the interest which it has, at different times, received
for the money it had advanced to the public, as well as according

or the shortness of the time. Upon other occasions, this great company has been reduced to the necessity of paying in sixpences.

to other circumstances. This rate of interest has gradually been
reduced from eight to three per cent. For some years past, the

It is not by augmenting the capital of the country, but by rendering a greater part of that capital active and productive than

bank dividend has been at five and a half per cent.
The stability of the bank of England is equal to that of the Brit-

would otherwise be so, that the most judicious operations of banking can increase the industry of the country. That part of his capi-

ish government. All that it has advanced to the public must be lost
before its creditors can sustain any loss. No other banking com-

tal which a dealer is obliged to keep by him unemployed and in
ready money, for answering occasional demands, is so much dead

pany in England can be established by act of parliament, or can

stock, which, so long as it remains in this situation, produces noth-

261

The Wealth of Nations
ing, either to him or to his country. The judicious operations of
banking enable him to convert this dead stock into active and

merce and industry of the country, however, it must be acknowledged, though they may be somewhat augmented, cannot be alto-

productive stock; into materials to work upon; into tools to work
with; and into provisions and subsistence to work for; into stock

gether so secure, when they are thus, as it were, suspended upon the
Daedalian wings of paper money, as when they travel about upon

which produces something both to himself and to his country.
The gold and silver money which circulates in any country, and

the solid ground of gold and silver. Over and above the accidents to
which they are exposed from the unskilfulness of the conductors of

by means of which, the produce of its land and labour is annually
circulated and distributed to the proper consumers, is, in the same

this paper money, they are liable to several others, from which no
prudence or skill of those conductors can guard them.

manner as the ready money of the dealer, all dead stock. It is a very
valuable part of the capital of the country, which produces noth-

An unsuccessful war, for example, in which the enemy got possession of the capital, and consequently of that treasure which

ing to the country. The judicious operations of banking, by substituting paper in the room of a great part of this gold and silver,

supported the credit of the paper money, would occasion a much
greater confusion in a country where the whole circulation was

enable the country to convert a great part of this dead stock into
active and productive stock; into stock which produces something

carried on by paper, than in one where the greater part of it was
carried on by gold and silver. The usual instrument of commerce

to the country. The gold and silver money which circulates in any
country may very properly be compared to a highway, which, while

having lost its value, no exchanges could be made but either by
barter or upon credit. All taxes having been usually paid in paper

it circulates and carries to market all the grass and corn of the
country, produces itself not a single pile of either. The judicious

money, the prince would not have wherewithal either to pay his
troops, or to furnish his magazines; and the state of the country

operations of banking, by providing, if I may be allowed so violent a metaphor, a sort of waggon-way through the air, enable the

would be much more irretrievable than if the greater part of its
circulation had consisted in gold and silver. A prince, anxious to

country to convert, as it were, a great part of its highways into
good pastures, and corn fields, and thereby to increase, very con-

maintain his dominions at all times in the state in which he can
most easily defend them, ought upon this account to guard not

siderably, the annual produce of its land and labour. The com-

only against that excessive multiplication of paper money which

262

Adam Smith
ruins the very banks which issue it, but even against that multiplication of it which enables them to fill the greater part of the circu-

to those of all the dealers, they can generally be transacted with a
much smaller quantity of money; the same pieces, by a more rapid

lation of the country with it.
The circulation of every country may be considered as divided

circulation, serving as the instrument of many more purchases of
the one kind than of the other.

into two different branches; the circulation of the dealers with
one another, and the circulation between the dealers and the con-

Paper money may be so regulated as either to confine itself very
much to the circulation between the different dealers, or to ex-

sumers. Though the same pieces of money, whether paper or metal,
may be employed sometimes in the one circulation and some-

tend itself likewise to a great part of that between the dealers and
the consumers. Where no bank notes are circulated under £10

times in the other; yet as both are constantly going on at the same
time, each requires a certain stock of money, of one kind or an-

value, as in London, paper money confines itself very much to the
circulation between the dealers. When a ten pound bank note

other, to carry it on. The value of the goods circulated between
the different dealers never can exceed the value of those circulated

comes into the hands of a consumer, he is generally obliged to
change it at the first shop where he has occasion to purchase five

between the dealers and the consumers; whatever is bought by the
dealers being ultimately destined to be sold to the consumers. The

shillings worth of goods; so that it often returns into the hands of
a dealer before the consumer has spent the fortieth part of the

circulation between the dealers, as it is carried on by wholesale,
requires generally a pretty large sum for every particular transac-

money. Where bank notes are issued for so small sums as 20s. as in
Scotland, paper money extends itself to a considerable part of the

tion. That between the dealers and the consumers, on the contrary, as it is generally carried on by retail, frequently requires but

circulation between dealers and consumers. Before the Act of parliament which put a stop to the circulation of ten and five shilling

very small ones, a shilling, or even a halfpenny, being often sufficient. But small sums circulate much faster than large ones. A

notes, it filled a still greater part of that circulation. In the currencies of North America, paper was commonly issued for so small a

shilling changes masters more frequently than a guinea, and a
halfpenny more frequently than a shilling. Though the annual

sum as a shilling, and filled almost the whole of that circulation.
In some paper currencies of Yorkshire, it was issued even for so

purchases of all the consumers, therefore, are at least equal in value

small a sum as a sixpence.

263

The Wealth of Nations
Where the issuing of bank notes for such very small sums is allowed, and commonly practised, many mean people are both en-

ishes gold and silver almost entirely from the country; almost all
the ordinary transactions of its interior commerce being thus car-

abled and encouraged to become bankers. A person whose promissory note for £5, or even for 20s. would be rejected by every body,

ried on by paper. The suppression of ten and five shilling bank
notes, somewhat relieved the scarcity of gold and silver in Scot-

will get it to be received without scruple when it is issued for so
small a sum as a sixpence. But the frequent bankruptcies to which

land; and the suppression of twenty shilling notes will probably
relieve it still more. Those metals are said to have become more

such beggarly bankers must be liable, may occasion a very considerable inconveniency, and sometimes even a very great calamity, to

abundant in America, since the suppression of some of their paper currencies. They are said, likewise, to have been more abun-

many poor people who had received their notes in payment.
It were better, perhaps, that no bank notes were issued in any

dant before the institution of those currencies.
Though paper money should be pretty much confined to the

part of the kingdom for a smaller sum than £5. Paper money would
then, probably, confine itself, in every part of the kingdom, to the

circulation between dealers and dealers, yet banks and bankers
might still be able to give nearly the same assistance to the indus-

circulation between the different dealers, as much as it does at
present in London, where no bank notes are issued under £10

try and commerce of the country, as they had done when paper
money filled almost the whole circulation. The ready money which

value; £5 being, in most part of the kingdom, a sum which, though
it will purchase, perhaps, little more than half the quantity of goods,

a dealer is obliged to keep by him, for answering occasional demands, is destined altogether for the circulation between himself

is as much considered, and is as seldom spent all at once, as £10
are amidst the profuse expense of London.

and other dealers of whom he buys goods. He has no occasion to
keep any by him for the circulation between himself and the con-

Where paper money, it is to be observed, is pretty much confined to the circulation between dealers and dealers, as at London,

sumers, who are his customers, and who bring ready money to
him, instead of taking any from him. Though no paper money,

there is always plenty of gold and silver. Where it extends itself to
a considerable part of the circulation between dealers and con-

therefore, was allowed to be issued, but for such sums as would
confine it pretty much to the circulation between dealers and deal-

sumers, as in Scotland, and still more in North America, it ban-

ers; yet partly by discounting real bills of exchange, and partly by

264

Adam Smith
lending upon cash-accounts, banks and bankers might still be able
to relieve the greater part of those dealers from the necessity of

and, in fact, always readily paid as soon as presented, is, in every
respect, equal in value to gold and silver money, since gold and

keeping any considerable part of their stock by them unemployed,
and in ready money, for answering occasional demands. They might

silver money can at anytime be had for it. Whatever is either bought
or sold for such paper, must necessarily be bought or sold as cheap

still be able to give the utmost assistance which banks and bankers
can with propriety give to traders of every kind.

as it could have been for gold and silver.
The increase of paper money, it has been said, by augmenting

To restrain private people, it may be said, from receiving in payment the promissory notes of a banker for any sum, whether great

the quantity, and consequently diminishing the value, of the whole
currency, necessarily augments the money price of commodities.

or small, when they themselves are willing to receive them; or, to
restrain a banker from issuing such notes, when all his neighbours

But as the quantity of gold and silver, which is taken from the
currency, is always equal to the quantity of paper which is added

are willing to accept of them, is a manifest violation of that natural liberty, which it is the proper business of law not to infringe,

to it, paper money does not necessarily increase the quantity of
the whole currency. From the beginning of the last century to the

but to support. Such regulations may, no doubt, be considered as
in some respect a violation of natural liberty. But those exertions

present time, provisions never were cheaper in Scotland than in
1759, though, from the circulation of ten and five shilling bank

of the natural liberty of a few individuals, which might endanger
the security of the whole society, are, and ought to be, restrained

notes, there was then more paper money in the country than at
present. The proportion between the price of provisions in Scot-

by the laws of all governments; of the most free, as well as or the
most despotical. The obligation of building party walls, in order

land and that in England is the same now as before the great multiplication of banking companies in Scotland. Corn is, upon most

to prevent the communication of fire, is a violation of natural
liberty, exactly of the same kind with the regulations of the bank-

occasions, fully as cheap in England as in France, though there is
a great deal of paper money in England, and scarce any in France.

ing trade which are here proposed.
A paper money, consisting in bank notes, issued by people of

In 1751 and 1752, when Mr Hume published his Political Discourses, and soon after the great multiplication of paper money in

undoubted credit, payable upon demand, without any condition,

Scotland, there was a very sensible rise in the price of provisions,

265

The Wealth of Nations
owing, probably, to the badness of the seasons, and not to the
multiplication of paper money.

content themselves with a part of what they demanded. The promissory notes of those banking companies constituted, at that time,

It would be otherwise, indeed, with a paper money, consisting
in promissory notes, of which the immediate payment depended,

the far greater part of the currency of Scotland, which this uncertainty of payment necessarily degraded below value of gold and

in any respect, either upon the good will of those who issued them,
or upon a condition which the holder of the notes might not al-

silver money. During the continuance of this abuse (which prevailed chiefly in 1762, 1763, and 1764), while the exchange be-

ways have it in his power to fulfil, or of which the payment was
not exigible till after a certain number of years, and which, in the

tween London and Carlisle was at par, that between London and
Dumfries would sometimes be four per cent. against Dumfries,

mean time, bore no interest. Such a paper money would, no doubt,
fall more or less below the value of gold and silver, according as

though this town is not thirty miles distant from Carlisle. But at
Carlisle, bills were paid in gold and silver; whereas at Dumfries

the difficulty or uncertainty of obtaining immediate payment was
supposed to be greater or less, or according to the greater or less

they were paid in Scotch bank notes; and the uncertainty of getting these bank notes exchanged for gold and silver coin, had thus

distance of time at which payment was exigible.
Some years ago the different banking companies of Scotland

degraded them four per cent. below the value of that coin. The
same act of parliament which suppressed ten and five shilling bank

were in the practice of inserting into their bank notes, what they
called an optional clause; by which they promised payment to the

notes, suppressed likewise this optional clause, and thereby restored the exchange between England and Scotland to its natural

bearer, either as soon as the note should be presented, or, in the
option of the directors, six months after such presentment, to-

rate, or to what the course of trade and remittances might happen
to make it.

gether with the legal interest for the said six months. The directors
of some of those banks sometimes took advantage of this optional

In the paper currencies of Yorkshire, the payment of so small a
sum as 6d. sometimes depended upon the condition, that the

clause, and sometimes threatened those who demanded gold and
silver in exchange for a considerable number of their notes, that

holder of the note should bring the change of a guinea to the
person who issued it; a condition which the holders of such notes

they would take advantage of it, unless such demanders would

might frequently find it very difficult to fulfil, and which must

266

Adam Smith
have degraded this currency below the value of gold and silver
money. An act of parliament, accordingly, declared all such clauses

who made any difference in the price of their goods when they
sold them for a colony paper, and when they sold them for gold

unlawful, and suppressed, in the same manner as in Scotland, all
promissory notes, payable to the bearer, under 20s. value.

and silver, a regulation equally tyrannical, but much less, effectual, than that which it was meant to support. A positive law may

The paper currencies of North America consisted, not in bank
notes payable to the bearer on demand, but in a government pa-

render a shilling a legal tender for a guinea, because it may direct
the courts of justice to discharge the debtor who has made that

per, of which the payment was not exigible till several years after it
was issued; and though the colony governments paid no interest

tender; but no positive law can oblige a person who sells goods,
and who is at liberty to sell or not to sell as he pleases, to accept of

to the holders of this paper, they declared it to be, and in fact
rendered it, a legal tender of payment for the full value for which

a shilling as equivalent to a guinea in the price of them. Notwithstanding any regulation of this kind, it appeared, by the course of

it was issued. But allowing the colony security to be perfectly good,
£100, payable fifteen years hence, for example, in a country where

exchange with Great Britain, that £100 sterling was occasionally
considered as equivalent, in some of the colonies, to £130, and in

interest is at six per cent., is worth little more than £40 ready
money. To oblige a creditor, therefore, to accept of this as full

others to so great a sum as £1100 currency; this difference in the
value arising from the difference in the quantity of paper emitted

payment for a debt of £100, actually paid down in ready money,
was an act of such violent injustice, as has scarce, perhaps, been

in the different colonies, and in the distance and probability of
the term of its final discharge and redemption.

attempted by the government of any other country which pretended to be free. It bears the evident marks of having originally

No law, therefore, could be more equitable than the act of parliament, so unjustly complained of in the colonies, which declared,

been, what the honest and downright Doctor Douglas assures us
it was, a scheme of fraudulent debtors to cheat their creditors. The

that no paper currency to be emitted there in time coming, should
be a legal tender of payment.

government of Pennsylvania, indeed, pretended, upon their first
emission of paper money, in 1722, to render their paper of equal

Pennsylvania was always more moderate in its emissions of paper money than any other of our colonies. Its paper currency, ac-

value with gold and silver, by enacting penalties against all those

cordingly, is said never to have sunk below the value of the gold

267

The Wealth of Nations
and silver which was current in the colony before the first emission of its paper money. Before that emission, the colony had raised

colonies very much above what could be employed in this manner.

the denomination of its coin, and had, by act of assembly, ordered
5s. sterling to pass in the colonies for 6s:3d., and afterwards for

A prince, who should enact that a certain proportion of his taxes
should be paid in a paper money of a certain kind, might thereby

6s:8d. A pound, colony currency, therefore, even when that currency was gold and silver, was more than thirty per cent. below

give a certain value to this paper money, even though the term of
its final discharge and redemption should depend altogether upon

the value of £1 sterling; and when that currency was turned into
paper, it was seldom much more than thirty per cent. below that

the will of the prince. If the bank which issued this paper was
careful to keep the quantity of it always somewhat below what

value. The pretence for raising the denomination of the coin was
to prevent the exportation of gold and silver, by making equal

could easily be employed in this manner, the demand for it might
be such as to make it even bear a premium, or sell for somewhat

quantities of those metals pass for greater sums in the colony than
they did in the mother country. It was found, however, that the

more in the market than the quantity of gold or silver currency for
which it was issued. Some people account in this manner for what

price of all goods from the mother country rose exactly in proportion as they raised the denomination of their coin, so that their

is called the agio of the bank of Amsterdam, or for the superiority
of bank money over current money, though this bank money, as

gold and silver were exported as fast as ever.
The paper of each colony being received in the payment of the

they pretend, cannot be taken out of the bank at the will of the
owner. The greater part of foreign bills of exchange must be paid

provincial taxes, for the full value for which it had been issued, it
necessarily derived from this use some additional value, over and

in bank money, that is, by a transfer in the books of the bank; and
the directors of the bank, they allege, are careful to keep the whole

above what it would have had, from the real or supposed distance
of the term of its final discharge and redemption. This additional

quantity of bank money always below what this use occasions a
demand for. It is upon this account, they say, the bank money sells

value was greater or less, according as the quantity of paper issued
was more or less above what could be employed in the payment of

for a premium, or bears an agio of four or five per cent. above the
same nominal sum of the gold and silver currency of the country.

the taxes of the particular colony which issued it. It was in all the

This account of the bank of Amsterdam, however, it will appear

268

Adam Smith
hereafter, is in a great measure chimerical.
A paper currency which falls below the value of gold and silver

the security of the public. It obliges all of them to be more circumspect in their conduct, and, by not extending their currency

coin, does not thereby sink the value of those metals, or occasion
equal quantities of them to exchange for a smaller quantity of

beyond its due proportion to their cash, to guard themselves against
those malicious runs, which the rivalship of so many competitors

goods of any other kind. The proportion between the value of
gold and silver and that of goods of any other kind, depends in all

is always ready to bring upon them. It restrains the circulation of
each particular company within a narrower circle, and reduces

cases, not upon the nature and quantity of any particular paper
money, which may be current in any particular country, but upon

their circulating notes to a smaller number. By dividing the whole
circulation into a greater number of parts, the failure of any one

the richness or poverty of the mines, which happen at any particular time to supply the great market of the commercial world

company, an accident which, in the course of things, must sometimes happen, becomes of less consequence to the public. This

with those metals. It depends upon the proportion between the
quantity of labour which is necessary in order to bring a certain

free competition, too, obliges all bankers to be more liberal in
their dealings with their customers, lest their rivals should carry

quantity of gold and silver to market, and that which is necessary
in order to bring thither a certain quantity of any other sort of

them away. In general, if any branch of trade, or any division of
labour, be advantageous to the public, the freer and more general

goods.
If bankers are restrained from issuing any circulating bank notes,

the competition, it will always be the more so.

or notes payable to the bearer, for less than a certain sum; and if
they are subjected to the obligation of an immediate and unconditional payment of such bank notes as soon as presented, their
trade may, with safety to the public, be rendered in all other respects perfectly free. The late multiplication of banking companies in both parts of the united kingdom, an event by which many
people have been much alarmed, instead of diminishing, increases

269

The Wealth of Nations

CHAPTER III

of the latter, however, has its value, and deserves its reward as well
as that of the former. But the labour of the manufacturer fixes and

OF THE ACCUMULATION OF CAPITAL,
OR OF PRODUCTIVE AND UNPRODUCTIVE LABOUR

realizes itself in some particular subject or vendible commodity,
which lasts for some time at least after that labour is past. It is, as

THERE IS ONE SORT OF LABOUR which adds to the value of the subject upon which it is bestowed; there is another which has no such

or, what is the same thing, the price of that subject, can afterwards, if necessary, put into motion a quantity of labour equal to

effect. The former as it produces a value, may be called productive, the latter, unproductive labour. {Some French authors of great

that which had originally produced it. The labour of the menial
servant, on the contrary, does not fix or realize itself in any par-

learning and ingenuity have used those words in a different sense.
In the last chapter of the fourth book, I shall endeavour to shew

ticular subject or vendible commodity. His services generally perish in the very instant of their performance, and seldom leave any

that their sense is an improper one.} Thus the labour of a manufacturer adds generally to the value of the materials which he works

trace of value behind them, for which an equal quantity of service
could afterwards be procured.

upon, that of his own maintenance, and of his master’s profit. The
labour of a menial servant, on the contrary, adds to the value of

The labour of some of the most respectable orders in the society
is, like that of menial servants, unproductive of any value, and

nothing. Though the manufacturer has his wages advanced to him
by his master, he in reality costs him no expense, the value of those

does not fix or realize itself in any permanent subject, or vendible
commodity, which endures after that labour is past, and for which

wages being generally restored, together with a profit, in the improved value of the subject upon which his labour is bestowed.

an equal quantity of labour could afterwards be procured. The
sovereign, for example, with all the officers both of justice and war

But the maintenance of a menial servant never is restored. A man
grows rich by employing a multitude of manufacturers; he grows

who serve under him, the whole army and navy, are unproductive
labourers. They are the servants of the public, and are maintained

poor by maintaining a multitude or menial servants. The labour

by a part of the annual produce of the industry of other people.

it were, a certain quantity of labour stocked and stored up, to be
employed, if necessary, upon some other occasion. That subject,

270

Adam Smith
Their service, how honourable, how useful, or how necessary soever,
produces nothing for which an equal quantity of service can after-

tive, and the next year’s produce will be greater or smaller accordingly; the whole annual produce, if we except the spontaneous

wards be procured. The protection, security, and defence, of the
commonwealth, the effect of their labour this year, will not pur-

productions of the earth, being the effect of productive labour.
Though the whole annual produce of the land and labour of ev-

chase its protection, security, and defence, for the year to come. In
the same class must be ranked, some both of the gravest and most

ery country is no doubt ultimately destined for supplying the consumption of its inhabitants, and for procuring a revenue to them;

important, and some of the most frivolous professions; churchmen, lawyers, physicians, men of letters of all kinds; players, buf-

yet when it first comes either from the ground, or from the hands of
the productive labourers, it naturally divides itself into two parts.

foons, musicians, opera-singers, opera-dancers, etc. The labour of
the meanest of these has a certain value, regulated by the very

One of them, and frequently the largest, is, in the first place, destined for replacing a capital, or for renewing the provisions, materi-

same principles which regulate that of every other sort of labour;
and that of the noblest and most useful, produces nothing which

als, and finished work, which had been withdrawn from a capital;
the other for constituting a revenue either to the owner of this capi-

could afterwards purchase or procure an equal quantity of labour.
Like the declamation of the actor, the harangue of the orator, or

tal, as the profit of his stock, or to some other person, as the rent of
his land. Thus, of the produce of land, one part replaces the capital

the tune of the musician, the work of all of them perishes in the
very instant of its production.

of the farmer; the other pays his profit and the rent of the landlord;
and thus constitutes a revenue both to the owner of this capital, as

Both productive and unproductive labourers, and those who do
not labour at all, are all equally maintained by the annual produce

the profits of his stock, and to some other person as the rent of his
land. Of the produce of a great manufactory, in the same manner,

of the land and labour of the country. This produce, how great
soever, can never be infinite, but must have certain limits. Accord-

one part, and that always the largest, replaces the capital of the undertaker of the work; the other pays his profit, and thus constitutes

ing, therefore, as a smaller or greater proportion of it is in any one
year employed in maintaining unproductive hands, the more in

a revenue to the owner of this capital.
That part of the annual produce of the land and labour of any

the one case, and the less in the other, will remain for the produc-

country which replaces a capital, never is immediately employed

271

The Wealth of Nations
to maintain any but productive hands. It pays the wages of productive labour only. That which is immediately destined for con-

able, may maintain a menial servant; or he may sometimes go to a
play or a puppet-show, and so contribute his share towards main-

stituting a revenue, either as profit or as rent, may maintain indifferently either productive or unproductive hands.

taining one set of unproductive labourers; or he may pay some
taxes, and thus help to maintain another set, more honourable

Whatever part of his stock a man employs as a capital, he always
expects it to be replaced to him with a profit. He employs it, there-

and useful, indeed, but equally unproductive. No part of the annual produce, however, which had been originally destined to re-

fore, in maintaining productive hands only; and after having served
in the function of a capital to him, it constitutes a revenue to

place a capital, is ever directed towards maintaining unproductive
hands, till after it has put into motion its full complement of pro-

them. Whenever he employs any part of it in maintaining unproductive hands of any kind, that part is from that moment with-

ductive labour, or all that it could put into motion in the way in
which it was employed. The workman must have earned his wages

drawn from his capital, and placed in his stock reserved for immediate consumption.

by work done, before he can employ any part of them in this
manner. That part, too, is generally but a small one. It is his spare

Unproductive labourers, and those who do not labour at all, are
all maintained by revenue; either, first, by that part of the annual

revenue only, of which productive labourers have seldom a great
deal. They generally have some, however; and in the payment of

produce which is originally destined for constituting a revenue to
some particular persons, either as the rent of land, or as the profits

taxes, the greatness of their number may compensate, in some
measure, the smallness of their contribution. The rent of land and

of stock; or, secondly, by that part which, though originally destined for replacing a capital, and for maintaining productive

the profits of stock are everywhere, therefore, the principal sources
from which unproductive hands derive their subsistence. These

labourers only, yet when it comes into their hands, whatever part
of it is over and above their necessary subsistence, may be em-

are the two sorts of revenue of which the owners have generally
most to spare. They might both maintain indifferently, either pro-

ployed in maintaining indifferently either productive or unproductive hands. Thus, not only the great landlord or the rich mer-

ductive or unproductive hands. They seem, however, to have some
predilection for the latter. The expense of a great lord feeds gener-

chant, but even the common workman, if his wages are consider-

ally more idle than industrious people The rich merchant, though

272

Adam Smith
with his capital he maintains industrious people only, yet by his
expense, that is, by the employment of his revenue, he feeds com-

him too, either as rent for his land, or as profit upon this paltry
capital. The occupiers of land were generally bond-men, whose

monly the very same sort as the great lord.
The proportion, therefore, between the productive and unpro-

persons and effects were equally his property. Those who were not
bond-men were tenants at will; and though the rent which they

ductive hands, depends very much in every country upon the proportion between that part of the annual produce, which, as soon

paid was often nominally little more than a quit-rent, it really
amounted to the whole produce of the land. Their lord could at

as it comes either from the ground, or from the hands of the productive labourers, is destined for replacing a capital, and that which

all times command their labour in peace and their service in war.
Though they lived at a distance from his house, they were equally

is destined for constituting a revenue, either as rent or as profit.
This proportion is very different in rich from what it is in poor

dependent upon him as his retainers who lived in it. But the whole
produce of the land undoubtedly belongs to him, who can dis-

countries.
Thus, at present, in the opulent countries of Europe, a very

pose of the labour and service of all those whom it maintains. In
the present state of Europe, the share of the landlord seldom ex-

large, frequently the largest, portion of the produce of the land, is
destined for replacing the capital of the rich and independent

ceeds a third, sometimes not a fourth part of the whole produce of
the land. The rent of land, however, in all the improved parts of

farmer; the other for paying his profits, and the rent of the landlord. But anciently, during the prevalency of the feudal govern-

the country, has been tripled and quadrupled since those ancient
times; and this third or fourth part of the annual produce is, it

ment, a very small portion of the produce was sufficient to replace
the capital employed in cultivation. It consisted commonly in a

seems, three or four times greater than the whole had been before.
In the progress of improvement, rent, though it increases in pro-

few wretched cattle, maintained altogether by the spontaneous
produce of uncultivated land, and which might, therefore, be con-

portion to the extent, diminishes in proportion to the produce of
the land.

sidered as a part of that spontaneous produce. It generally, too,
belonged to the landlord, and was by him advanced to the occupi-

In the opulent countries of Europe, great capitals are at present
employed in trade and manufactures. In the ancient state, the little

ers of the land. All the rest of the produce properly belonged to

trade that was stirring, and the few homely and coarse manufac-

273

The Wealth of Nations
tures that were carried on, required but very small capitals. These,
however, must have yielded very large profits. The rate of interest

mines in every country the general character of the inhabitants as
to industry or idleness. We are more industrious than our forefa-

was nowhere less than ten per cent. and their profits must have
been sufficient to afford this great interest. At present, the rate of

thers, because, in the present times, the funds destined for the
maintenance of industry are much greater in proportion to those

interest, in the improved parts of Europe, is nowhere higher than
six per cent.; and in some of the most improved, it is so low as

which are likely to be employed in the maintenance of idleness,
than they were two or three centuries ago. Our ancestors were idle

four, three, and two per cent. Though that part of the revenue of
the inhabitants which is derived from the profits of stock, is al-

for want of a sufficient encouragement to industry. It is better,
says the proverb, to play for nothing, than to work for nothing. In

ways much greater in rich than in poor countries, it is because the
stock is much greater; in proportion to the stock, the profits are

mercantile and manufacturing towns, where the inferior ranks of
people are chiefly maintained by the employment of capital, they

generally much less.
That part of the annual produce, therefore, which, as soon as it

are in general industrious, sober, and thriving; as in many English, and in most Dutch towns. In those towns which are princi-

comes either from the ground, or from the hands of the productive labourers, is destined for replacing a capital, is not only much

pally supported by the constant or occasional residence of a court,
and in which the inferior ranks of people are chiefly maintained

greater in rich than in poor countries, but bears a much greater
proportion to that which is immediately destined for constituting

by the spending of revenue, they are in general idle, dissolute, and
poor; as at Rome, Versailles, Compeigne, and Fontainbleau. If

a revenue either as rent or as profit. The funds destined for the
maintenance of productive labour are not only much greater in

you except Rouen and Bourdeaux, there is little trade or industry
in any of the parliament towns of France; and the inferior ranks of

the former than in the latter, but bear a much greater proportion
to those which, though they may be employed to maintain either

people, being chiefly maintained by the expense of the members
of the courts of justice, and of those who come to plead before

productive or unproductive hands, have generally a predilection
for the latter.

them, are in general idle and poor. The great trade of Rouen and
Bourdeaux seems to be altogether the effect of their situation.

The proportion between those different funds necessarily deter-

Rouen is necessarily the entrepot of almost all the goods which are

274

Adam Smith
brought either from foreign countries, or from the maritime provinces of France, for the consumption of the great city of Paris.

to be the entrepots of a great part of the goods destined for the
consumption of distant places. In a city where a great revenue is

Bourdeaux is, in the same manner, the entrepot of the wines which
grow upon the banks of the Garronne, and of the rivers which run

spent, to employ with advantage a capital for any other purpose
than for supplying the consumption of that city, is probably more

into it, one of the richest wine countries in the world, and which
seems to produce the wine fittest for exportation, or best suited to

difficult than in one in which the inferior ranks of people have no
other maintenance but what they derive from the employment of

the taste of foreign nations. Such advantageous situations necessarily attract a great capital by the great employment which they

such a capital. The idleness of the greater part of the people who
are maintained by the expense of revenue, corrupts, it is probable,

afford it; and the employment of this capital is the cause of the
industry of those two cities. In the other parliament towns of

the industry of those who ought to be maintained by the employment of capital, and renders it less advantageous to employ a capi-

France, very little more capital seems to be employed than what is
necessary for supplying their own consumption; that is, little more

tal there than in other places. There was little trade or industry in
Edinburgh before the Union. When the Scotch parliament was

than the smallest capital which can be employed in them. The
same thing may be said of Paris, Madrid, and Vienna. Of those

no longer to be assembled in it, when it ceased to be the necessary
residence of the principal nobility and gentry of Scotland, it be-

three cities, Paris is by far the most industrious, but Paris itself is
the principal market of all the manufactures established at Paris,

came a city of some trade and industry. It still continues, however,
to be the residence of the principal courts of justice in Scotland, of

and its own consumption is the principal object of all the trade
which it carries on. London, Lisbon, and Copenhagen, are, per-

the boards of customs and excise, etc. A considerable revenue,
therefore, still continues to be spent in it. In trade and industry, it

haps, the only three cities in Europe, which are both the constant
residence of a court, and can at the same time be considered as

is much inferior to Glasgow, of which the inhabitants are chiefly
maintained by the employment of capital. The inhabitants of a

trading cities, or as cities which trade not only for their own consumption, but for that of other cities and countries. The situation

large village, it has sometimes been observed, after having made
considerable progress in manufactures, have become idle and poor,

of all the three is extremely advantageous, and naturally fits them

in consequence of a great lord’s having taken up his residence in

275

The Wealth of Nations
their neighbourhood.
The proportion between capital and revenue, therefore, seems

Parsimony, by increasing the fund which is destined for the maintenance of productive hands, tends to increase the number of those

everywhere to regulate the proportion between industry and idleness Wherever capital predominates, industry prevails; wherever

hands whose labour adds to the value of the subject upon winch it
is bestowed. It tends, therefore, to increase the exchangeable value

revenue, idleness. Every increase or diminution of capital, therefore, naturally tends to increase or diminish the real quantity of

of the annual produce of the land and labour of the country. It
puts into motion an additional quantity of industry, which gives

industry, the number of productive hands, and consequently the
exchangeable value of the annual produce of the land and labour

an additional value to the annual produce.
What is annually saved, is as regularly consumed as what is an-

of the country, the real wealth and revenue of all its inhabitants.
Capitals are increased by parsimony, and diminished by prodi-

nually spent, and nearly in the same time too: but it is consumed
by a different set of people. That portion of his revenue which a

gality and misconduct.
Whatever a person saves from his revenue he adds to his capital,

rich man annually spends, is, in most cases, consumed by idle
guests and menial servants, who leave nothing behind them in

and either employs it himself in maintaining an additional number of productive hands, or enables some other person to do so,

return for their consumption. That portion which he annually
saves, as, for the sake of the profit, it is immediately employed as a

by lending it to him for an interest, that is, for a share of the
profits. As the capital of an individual can be increased only by

capital, is consumed in the same manner, and nearly in the same
time too, but by a different set of people: by labourers, manufac-

what he saves from his annual revenue or his annual gains, so the
capital of a society, which is the same with that of all the individu-

turers, and artificers, who reproduce, with a profit, the value of
their annual consumption. His revenue, we shall suppose, is paid

als who compose it, can be increased only in the same manner.
Parsimony, and not industry, is the immediate cause of the increase

him in money. Had he spent the whole, the food, clothing, and
lodging, which the whole could have purchased, would have been

of capital. Industry, indeed, provides the subject which parsimony
accumulates; but whatever industry might acquire, if parsimony did

distributed among the former set of people. By saving a part of it,
as that part is, for the sake of the profit, immediately employed as

not save and store up, the capital would never be the greater.

a capital, either by himself or by some other person, the food,

276

Adam Smith
clothing, and lodging, which may be purchased with it, are necessarily reserved for the latter. The consumption is the same, but the

adds a value to the subject upon which it is bestowed, and, consequently, the value of the annual produce of the land and labour of

consumers are different.
By what a frugal man annually saves, he not only affords main-

the whole country, the real wealth and revenue of its inhabitants.
If the prodigality of some were not compensated by the frugality

tenance to an additional number of productive hands, for that of
the ensuing year, but like the founder of a public work-house he

of others, the conduct of every prodigal, by feeding the idle with
the bread of the industrious, would tend not only to beggar him-

establishes, as it were, a perpetual fund for the maintenance of an
equal number in all times to come. The perpetual allotment and

self, but to impoverish his country.
Though the expense of the prodigal should be altogether in home

destination of this fund, indeed, is not always guarded by any
positive law, by any trust-right or deed of mortmain. It is always

made, and no part of it in foreign commodities, its effect upon
the productive funds of the society would still be the same. Every

guarded, however, by a very powerful principle, the plain and evident interest of every individual to whom any share of it shall ever

year there would still be a certain quantity of food and clothing,
which ought to have maintained productive, employed in main-

belong. No part of it can ever afterwards be employed to maintain
any but productive hands, without an evident loss to the person

taining unproductive hands. Every year, therefore, there would
still be some diminution in what would otherwise have been the

who thus perverts it from its proper destination.
The prodigal perverts it in this manner: By not confining his

value of the annual produce of the land and labour of the country.
This expense, it may be said, indeed, not being in foreign goods,

expense within his income, he encroaches upon his capital. Like
him who perverts the revenues of some pious foundation to pro-

and not occasioning any exportation of gold and silver, the same
quantity of money would remain in the country as before. But if

fane purposes, he pays the wages of idleness with those funds which
the frugality of his forefathers had, as it were, consecrated to the

the quantity of food and clothing which were thus consumed by
unproductive, had been distributed among productive hands, they

maintenance of industry. By diminishing the funds destined for
the employment of productive labour, he necessarily diminishes,

would have reproduced, together with a profit, the full value of
their consumption. The same quantity of money would, in this

so far as it depends upon him, the quantity of that labour which

case, equally have remained in the country, and there would, be-

277

The Wealth of Nations
sides, have been a reproduction of an equal value of consumable
goods. There would have been two values instead of one.

value of its own annual produce. What in the days of its prosperity had been saved from that annual produce, and employed in

The same quantity of money, besides, can not long remain in
any country in which the value of the annual produce diminishes.

purchasing gold and silver, will contribute, for some little time, to
support its consumption in adversity. The exportation of gold and

The sole use of money is to circulate consumable goods. By means
of it, provisions, materials, and finished work, are bought and

silver is, in this case, not the cause, but the effect of its declension,
and may even, for some little time, alleviate the misery of that

sold, and distributed to their proper consumers. The quantity of
money, therefore, which can be annually employed in any coun-

declension.
The quantity of money, on the contrary, must in every country

try, must be determined by the value of the consumable goods
annually circulated within it. These must consist, either in the

naturally increase as the value of the annual produce increases.
The value of the consumable goods annually circulated within the

immediate produce of the land and labour of the country itself, or
in something which had been purchased with some part of that

society being greater, will require a greater quantity of money to
circulate them. A part of the increased produce, therefore, will

produce. Their value, therefore, must diminish as the value of that
produce diminishes, and along with it the quantity of money which

naturally be employed in purchasing, wherever it is to be had, the
additional quantity of gold and silver necessary for circulating the

can be employed in circulating them. But the money which, by
this annual diminution of produce, is annually thrown out of

rest. The increase of those metals will, in this case, be the effect,
not the cause, of the public prosperity. Gold and silver are pur-

domestic circulation, will not be allowed to lie idle. The interest
of whoever possesses it requires that it should be employed; but

chased everywhere in the same manner. The food, clothing, and
lodging, the revenue and maintenance, of all those whose labour

having no employment at home, it will, in spite of all laws and
prohibitions, be sent abroad, and employed in purchasing con-

or stock is employed in bringing them from the mine to the market, is the price paid for them in Peru as well as in England. The

sumable goods, which may be of some use at home. Its annual
exportation will, in this manner, continue for some time to add

country which has this price to pay, will never belong without the
quantity of those metals which it has occasion for; and no country

something to the annual consumption of the country beyond the

will ever long retain a quantity which it has no occasion for.

278

Adam Smith
Whatever, therefore, we may imagine the real wealth and revenue of a country to consist in, whether in the value of the annual

pense is the passion for present enjoyment; which, though sometimes violent and very difficult to be restrained, is in general only

produce of its land and labour, as plain reason seems to dictate, or
in the quantity of the precious metals which circulate within it, as

momentary and occasional. But the principle which prompts to
save, is the desire of bettering our condition; a desire which, though

vulgar prejudices suppose; in either view of the matter, every prodigal appears to be a public enemy, and every frugal man a public

generally calm and dispassionate, comes with us from the womb,
and never leaves us till we go into the grave. In the whole interval

benefactor.
The effects of misconduct are often the same as those of prodi-

which separates those two moments, there is scarce, perhaps, a
single instance, in which any man is so perfectly and completely

gality. Every injudicious and unsuccessful project in agriculture,
mines, fisheries, trade, or manufactures, tends in the same man-

satisfied with his situation, as to be without any wish of alteration
or improvement of any kind. An augmentation of fortune is the

ner to diminish the funds destined for the maintenance of productive labour. In every such project, though the capital is con-

means by which the greater part of men propose and wish to better their condition. It is the means the most vulgar and the most

sumed by productive hands only, yet as, by the injudicious manner in which they are employed, they do not reproduce the full

obvious; and the most likely way of augmenting their fortune, is
to save and accumulate some part of what they acquire, either

value of their consumption, there must always be some diminution in what would otherwise have been the productive funds of

regularly and annually, or upon some extraordinary occasion.
Though the principle of expense, therefore, prevails in almost all

the society.
It can seldom happen, indeed, that the circumstances of a great

men upon some occasions, and in some men upon almost all occasions; yet in the greater part of men, taking the whole course of

nation can be much affected either by the prodigality or misconduct of individuals; the profusion or imprudence of some being

their life at an average, the principle of frugality seems not only to
predominate, but to predominate very greatly.

always more than compensated by the frugality and good conduct
of others.

With regard to misconduct, the number of prudent and successful undertakings is everywhere much greater than that of inju-

With regard to profusion, the principle which prompts to ex-

dicious and unsuccessful ones. After all our complaints of the fre-

279

The Wealth of Nations
quency of bankruptcies, the unhappy men who fall into this misfortune, make but a very small part of the whole number engaged

second. Those unproductive hands who should be maintained by
a part only of the spare revenue of the people, may consume so

in trade, and all other sorts of business; not much more, perhaps,
than one in a thousand. Bankruptcy is, perhaps, the greatest and

great a share of their whole revenue, and thereby oblige so great a
number to encroach upon their capitals, upon the funds destined

most humiliating calamity which can befal an innocent man. The
greater part of men, therefore, are sufficiently careful to avoid it.

for the maintenance of productive labour, that all the frugality
and good conduct of individuals may not be able to compensate

Some, indeed, do not avoid it; as some do not avoid the gallows.
Great nations are never impoverished by private, though they

the waste and degradation of produce occasioned by this violent
and forced encroachment.

sometimes are by public prodigality and misconduct. The whole,
or almost the whole public revenue is, in most countries, employed

This frugality and good conduct, however, is, upon most occasions, it appears from experience, sufficient to compensate, not only

in maintaining unproductive hands. Such are the people who compose a numerous and splendid court, a great ecclesiastical estab-

the private prodigality and misconduct of individuals, but the public extravagance of government. The uniform, constant, and unin-

lishment, great fleets and armies, who in time of peace produce
nothing, and in time of war acquire nothing which can compen-

terrupted effort of every man to better his condition, the principle
from which public and national, as well as private opulence is origi-

sate the expense of maintaining them, even while the war lasts.
Such people, as they themselves produce nothing, are all main-

nally derived,is frequently powerful enough to maintain the natural
progress of things towards improvement, in spite both of the ex-

tained by the produce of other men’s labour. When multiplied,
therefore, to an unnecessary number, they may in a particular year

travagance of government, and of the greatest errors of administration. Like the unknown principle of animal life, it frequently re-

consume so great a share of this produce, as not to leave a sufficiency for maintaining the productive labourers, who should re-

stores health and vigour to the constitution, in spite not only of the
disease, but of the absurd prescriptions of the doctor.

produce it next year. The next year’s produce, therefore, will be
less than that of the foregoing; and if the same disorder should

The annual produce of the land and labour of any nation can be
increased in its value by no other means, but by increasing either

continue, that of the third year will be still less than that of the

the number of its productive labourers, or the productive powers

280

Adam Smith
of those labourers who had before been employed. The number of
its productive labourers, it is evident, can never be much increased,

the private misconduct of others, or by the public extravagance of
government. But we shall find this to have been the case of almost

but in consequence of an increase of capital, or of the funds destined for maintaining them. The productive powers of the same

all nations, in all tolerably quiet and peaceable times, even of those
who have not enjoyed the most prudent and parsimonious gov-

number of labourers cannot be increased, but in consequence either of some addition and improvement to those machines and

ernments. To form a right judgment of it, indeed, we must compare the state of the country at periods somewhat distant from

instruments which facilitate and abridge labour, or of more proper
division and distribution of employment. In either case, an addi-

one another. The progress is frequently so gradual, that, at near
periods, the improvement is not only not sensible, but, from the

tional capital is almost always required. It is by means of an additional capital only, that the undertaker of any work can either

declension either of certain branches of industry, or of certain districts of the country, things which sometimes happen, though the

provide his workmen with better machinery, or make a more proper
distribution of employment among them. When the work to be

country in general is in great prosperity, there frequently arises a
suspicion, that the riches and industry of the whole are decaying.

done consists of a number of parts, to keep every man constantly
employed in one way, requires a much greater capital than where

The annual produce of the land and labour of England, for
example, is certainly much greater than it was a little more than a

every man is occasionally employed in every different part of the
work. When we compare, therefore, the state of a nation at two

century ago, at the restoration of Charles II. Though at present
few people, I believe, doubt of this, yet during this period five

different periods, and find that the annual produce of its land and
labour is evidently greater at the latter than at the former, that its

years have seldom passed away, in which some book or pamphlet
has not been published, written, too, with such abilities as to gain

lands are better cultivated, its manufactures more numerous and
more flourishing, and its trade more extensive; we may be assured

some authority with the public, and pretending to demonstrate
that the wealth of the nation was fast declining; that the country

that its capital must have increased during the interval between
those two periods, and that more must have been added to it by

was depopulated, agriculture neglected, manufactures decaying,
and trade undone. Nor have these publications been all party pam-

the good conduct of some, than had been taken from it either by

phlets, the wretched offspring of falsehood and venality. Many of

281

The Wealth of Nations
them have been written by very candid and very intelligent people,
who wrote nothing but what they believed, and for no other rea-

country, at the end of the period, poorer than at the beginning.
Thus, in the happiest and most fortunate period of them all, that

son but because they believed it.
The annual produce of the land and labour of England, again,

which has passed since the Restoration, how many disorders and
misfortunes have occurred, which, could they have been foreseen,

was certainly much greater at the Restoration than we can suppose it to have been about a hundred years before, at the accession

not only the impoverishment, but the total ruin of the country
would have been expected from them? The fire and the plague of

of Elizabeth. At this period, too, we have all reason to believe, the
country was much more advanced in improvement, than it had

London, the two Dutch wars, the disorders of the revolution, the
war in Ireland, the four expensive French wars of 1688, 1701,

been about a century before, towards the close of the dissensions
between the houses of York and Lancaster. Even then it was, prob-

1742, and 1756, together with the two rebellions of 1715 and
1745. In the course of the four French wars, the nation has con-

ably, in a better condition than it had been at the Norman conquest: and at the Norman conquest, than during the confusion of

tracted more than £145,000,000 of debt, over and above all the
other extraordinary annual expense which they occasioned; so that

the Saxon heptarchy. Even at this early period, it was certainly a
more improved country than at the invasion of Julius Caesar, when

the whole cannot be computed at less than £200,000,000. So great
a share of the annual produce of the land and labour of the coun-

its inhabitants were nearly in the same state with the savages in
North America.

try, has, since the Revolution, been employed upon different occasions, in maintaining an extraordinary number of unproductive

In each of those periods, however, there was not only much
private and public profusion, many expensive and unnecessary

hands. But had not those wars given this particular direction to so
large a capital, the greater part of it would naturally have been

wars, great perversion of the annual produce from maintaining
productive to maintain unproductive hands; but sometimes, in

employed in maintaining productive hands, whose labour would
have replaced, with a profit, the whole value of their consump-

the confusion of civil discord, such absolute waste and destruction of stock, as might be supposed, not only to retard, as it cer-

tion. The value of the annual produce of the land and labour of
the country would have been considerably increased by it every

tainly did, the natural accumulation of riches, but to have left the

year, and every years increase would have augmented still more

282

Adam Smith
that of the following year. More houses would have been built,
more lands would have been improved, and those which had been

ous government, so parsimony has at no time been the characteristic virtue of its inhabitants. It is the highest impertinence and

improved before would have been better cultivated; more manufactures would have been established, and those which had been

presumption, therefore, in kings and ministers to pretend to watch
over the economy of private people, and to restrain their expense,

established before would have been more extended; and to what
height the real wealth and revenue of the country might by this

either by sumptuary laws, or by prohibiting the importation of
foreign luxuries. They are themselves always, and without any ex-

time have been raised, it is not perhaps very easy even to imagine.
But though the profusion of government must undoubtedly have

ception, the greatest spendthrifts in the society. Let them look
well after their own expense, and they may safely trust private

retarded the natural progress of England towards wealth and improvement, it has not been able to stop it. The annual produce of

people with theirs. If their own extravagance does not ruin the
state, that of the subject never will.

its land and labour is undoubtedly much greater at present than it
was either at the Restoration or at the Revolution. The capital,

As frugality increases, and prodigality diminishes, the public
capital, so the conduct of those whose expense just equals their

therefore, annually employed in cultivating this land, and in maintaining this labour, must likewise be much greater. In the midst of

revenue, without either accumulating or encroaching, neither increases nor diminishes it. Some modes of expense, however, seem

all the exactions of government, this capital has been silently and
gradually accumulated by the private frugality and good conduct

to contribute more to the growth of public opulence than others.
The revenue of an individual may be spent, either in things

of individuals, by their universal, continual, and uninterrupted
effort to better their own condition. It is this effort, protected by

which are consumed immediately, and in which one day’s expense
can neither alleviate nor support that of another; or it may be

law, and allowed by liberty to exert itself in the manner that is
most advantageous, which has maintained the progress of England

spent in things mere durable, which can therefore be accumulated, and in which every day’s expense may, as he chooses, either

towards opulence and improvement in almost all former times,
and which, it is to be hoped, will do so in all future times. En-

alleviate, or support and heighten, the effect of that of the following day. A man of fortune, for example, may either spend his rev-

gland, however, as it has never been blessed with a very parsimoni-

enue in a profuse and sumptuous table, and in maintaining a great

283

The Wealth of Nations
number of menial servants, and a multitude of dogs and horses;
or, contenting himself with a frugal table, and few attendants, he

to the opulence of an individual, so is it likewise to that of a nation. The houses, the furniture, the clothing of the rich, in a little

may lay out the greater part of it in adorning his house or his
country villa, in useful or ornamental buildings, in useful or orna-

time, become useful to the inferior and middling ranks of people.
They are able to purchase them when their superiors grow weary

mental furniture, in collecting books, statues, pictures; or in things
more frivolous, jewels, baubles, ingenious trinkets of different

of them; and the general accommodation of the whole people is
thus gradually improved, when this mode of expense becomes uni-

kinds; or, what is most trifling of all, in amassing a great wardrobe
of fine clothes, like the favourite and minister of a great prince

versal among men of fortune. In countries which have long been
rich, you will frequently find the inferior ranks of people in pos-

who died a few years ago. Were two men of equal fortune to spend
their revenue, the one chiefly in the one way, the other in the

session both of houses and furniture perfectly good and entire,
but of which neither the one could have been built, nor the other

other, the magnificence of the person whose expense had been
chiefly in durable commodities, would be continually increasing,

have been made for their use. What was formerly a seat of the
family of Seymour, is now an inn upon the Bath road. The mar-

every day’s expense contributing something to support and
heighten the effect of that of the following day; that of the other,

riage-bed of James I. of Great Britain, which his queen brought
with her from Denmark, as a present fit for a sovereign to make to

on the contrary, would be no greater at the end of the period than
at the beginning. The former too would, at the end of the period,

a sovereign, was, a few years ago, the ornament of an alehouse at
Dunfermline. In some ancient cities, which either have been long

be the richer man of the two. He would have a stock of goods of
some kind or other, which, though it might not be worth all that

stationary, or have gone somewhat to decay, you will sometimes
scarce find a single house which could have been built for its present

it cost, would always be worth something. No trace or vestige of
the expense of the latter would remain, and the effects of ten or

inhabitants. If you go into those houses, too, you will frequently
find many excellent, though antiquated pieces of furniture, which

twenty years’ profusion would be as completely annihilated as if
they had never existed.

are still very fit for use, and which could as little have been made
for them. Noble palaces, magnificent villas, great collections of

As the one mode of expense is more favourable than the other

books, statues, pictures, and other curiosities, are frequently both

284

Adam Smith
an ornament and an honour, not only to the neighbourhood, but
to the whole country to which they belong. Versailles is an orna-

unnecessary by former expense; and when a person stops short, he
appears to do so, not because he has exceeded his fortune, but

ment and an honour to France, Stowe and Wilton to England.
Italy still continues to command some sort of veneration, by the

because he has satisfied his fancy.
The expense, besides, that is laid out in durable commodities,

number of monuments of this kind which it possesses, though the
wealth which produced them has decayed, and though the genius

gives maintenance, commonly, to a greater number of people than
that which is employed in the most profuse hospitality. Of two or

which planned them seems to be extinguished, perhaps from not
having the same employment.

three hundred weight of provisions, which may sometimes be
served up at a great festival, one half, perhaps, is thrown to the

The expense, too, which is laid out in durable commodities, is
favourable not only to accumulation, but to frugality. If a person

dunghill, and there is always a great deal wasted and abused. But
if the expense of this entertainment had been employed in setting

should at any time exceed in it, he can easily reform without exposing himself to the censure of the public. To reduce very much

to work masons, carpenters, upholsterers, mechanics, etc. a quantity of provisions of equal value would have been distributed among

the number of his servants, to reform his table from great profusion to great frugality, to lay down his equipage after he has once

a still greater number of people, who would have bought them in
pennyworths and pound weights, and not have lost or thrown

set it up, are changes which cannot escape the observation of his
neighbours, and which are supposed to imply some acknowledg-

away a single ounce of them. In the one way, besides, this expense
maintains productive, in the other unproductive hands. In the

ment of preceding bad conduct. Few, therefore, of those who have
once been so unfortunate as to launch out too far into this sort of

one way, therefore, it increases, in the other it does not increase
the exchangeable value of the annual produce of the land and

expense, have afterwards the courage to reform, till ruin and bankruptcy oblige them. But if a person has, at any time, been at too

labour of the country.
I would not, however, by all this, be understood to mean, that

great an expense in building, in furniture, in books, or pictures,
no imprudence can be inferred from his changing his conduct.

the one species of expense always betokens a more liberal or generous spirit than the other. When a man of fortune spends his

These are things in which further expense is frequently rendered

revenue chiefly in hospitality, he shares the greater part of it with

285

The Wealth of Nations
his friends and companions; but when he employs it in purchasing such durable commodities, he often spends the whole upon

CHAPTER IV

his own person, and gives nothing to any body without an equivalent. The latter species of expense, therefore, especially when di-

OF STOCK LENT AT INTEREST

rected towards frivolous objects, the little ornaments of dress and
furniture, jewels, trinkets, gew-gaws, frequently indicates, not only

THE STOCK which is lent at interest is always considered as a capital by the lender. He expects that in due time it is to be restored to

a trifling, but a base and selfish disposition. All that I mean is, that
the one sort of expense, as it always occasions some accumulation

him, and that, in the mean time, the borrower is to pay him a
certain annual rent for the use of it. The borrower may use it

of valuable commodities, as it is more favourable to private frugality, and, consequently, to the increase of the public capital, and

either as a capital, or as a stock reserved for immediate consumption. If he uses it as a capital, he employs it in the maintenance of

as it maintains productive rather than unproductive hands,
conduces more than the other to the growth of public opulence.

productive labourers, who reproduce the value, with a profit. He
can, in this case, both restore the capital, and pay the interest,
without alienating or encroaching upon any other source of revenue. If he uses it as a stock reserved for immediate consumption,
he acts the part of a prodigal, and dissipates, in the maintenance
of the idle, what was destined for the support of the industrious.
He can, in this case, neither restore the capital nor pay the interest, without either alienating or encroaching upon some other
source of revenue, such as the property or the rent of land.
The stock which is lent at interest is, no doubt, occasionally
employed in both these ways, but in the former much more frequently than in the latter. The man who borrows in order to spend
will soon be ruined, and he who lends to him will generally have

286

Adam Smith
occasion to repent of his folly. To borrow or to lend for such a
purpose, therefore, is, in all cases, where gross usury is out of the

try gentlemen could not have replaced from the rents of their estates. It is not properly borrowed in order to be spent, but in order

question, contrary to the interest of both parties; and though it no
doubt happens sometimes, that people do both the one and the

to replace a capital which had been spent before.
Almost all loans at interest are made in money, either of paper,

other, yet, from the regard that all men have for their own interest,
we may be assured, that it cannot happen so very frequently as we

or of gold and silver; but what the borrower really wants, and
what the lender readily supplies him with, is not the money, but

are sometimes apt to imagine. Ask any rich man of common prudence, to which of the two sorts of people he has lent the greater

the money’s worth, or the goods which it can purchase. If he wants
it as a stock for immediate consumption, it is those goods only

part of his stock, to those who he thinks will employ it profitably,
or to those who will spend it idly, and he will laugh at you for

which he can place in that stock. If he wants it as a capital for
employing industry, it is from those goods only that the industri-

proposing the question. Even among borrowers, therefore, not
the people in the world most famous for frugality, the number of

ous can be furnished with the tools, materials, and maintenance
necessary for carrying on their work. By means of the loan, the

the frugal and industrious surpasses considerably that of the prodigal and idle.

lender, as it were, assigns to the borrower his right to a certain
portion of the annual produce of the land and labour of the coun-

The only people to whom stock is commonly lent, without their
being expected to make any very profitable use of it, are country

try, to be employed as the borrower pleases.
The quantity of stock, therefore, or, as it is commonly expressed,

gentlemen, who borrow upon mortgage. Even they scarce ever
borrow merely to spend. What they borrow, one may say, is com-

of money, which can be lent at interest in any country, is not
regulated by the value of the money, whether paper or coin, which

monly spent before they borrow it. They have generally consumed
so great a quantity of goods, advanced to them upon credit by

serves as the instrument of the different loans made in that country, but by the value of that part of the annual produce, which, as

shop-keepers and tradesmen, that they find it necessary to borrow
at interest, in order to pay the debt. The capital borrowed replaces

soon as it comes either from the ground, or from the hands of the
productive labourers, is destined, not only for replacing a capital,

the capitals of those shop-keepers and tradesmen which the coun-

but such a capital as the owner does not care to be at the trouble of

287

The Wealth of Nations
employing himself. As such capitals are commonly lent out and
paid back in money, they constitute what is called the monied

consist both the value and the use of the loans. The stock lent by the
three monied men is equal to the value of the goods which can be

interest. It is distinct, not only from the landed, but from the
trading and manufacturing interests, as in these last the owners

purchased with it, and is three times greater than that of the money
with which the purchases are made. Those loans, however, may be

themselves employ their own capitals. Even in the monied interest, however, the money is, as it were, but the deed of assignment,

all perfectly well secured, the goods purchased by the different debtors being so employed as, in due time, to bring back, with a profit,

which conveys from one hand to another those capitals which the
owners do not care to employ themselves. Those capitals may be

an equal value either of coin or of paper. And as the same pieces of
money can thus serve as the instrument of different loans to three,

greater, in almost any proportion, than the amount of the money
which serves as the instrument of their conveyance; the same pieces

or, for the same reason, to thirty times their value, so they may
likewise successively serve as the instrument of repayment.

of money successively serving for many different loans, as well as
for many different purchases. A, for example, lends to W £1000,

A capital lent at interest may, in this manner, be considered as
an assignment, from the lender to the borrower, of a certain con-

with which W immediately purchases of B £1000 worth of goods.
B having no occasion for the money himself, lends the identical

siderable portion of the annual produce, upon condition that the
burrower in return shall, during the continuance of the loan, an-

pieces to X, with which X immediately purchases of C another
£1000 worth of goods. C, in the same manner, and for the same

nually assign to the lender a small portion, called the interest; and,
at the end of it, a portion equally considerable with that which

reason, lends them to Y, who again purchases goods with them of
D. In this manner, the same pieces, either of coin or of paper,

had originally been assigned to him, called the repayment. Though
money, either coin or paper, serves generally as the deed of assign-

may, in the course of a few days, serve as the Instrument of three
different loans, and of three different purchases, each of which is,

ment, both to the smaller and to the more considerable portion, it
is itself altogether different from what is assigned by it.

in value, equal to the whole amount of those pieces. What the
three monied men, A, B, and C, assigned to the three borrowers,

In proportion as that share of the annual produce which, as
soon as it comes either from the ground, or from the hands of the

W, X, and Y, is the power of making those purchases. In this power

productive labourers, is destined for replacing a capital, increases

288

Adam Smith
in any country, what is called the monied interest naturally increases with it. The increase of those particular capitals from which

taining it, grows every day greater and greater. Labourers easily find
employment; but the owners of capitals find it difficult to get

the owners wish to derive a revenue, without being at the trouble
of employing them themselves, naturally accompanies the general

labourers to employ. Their competition raises the wages of labour,
and sinks the profits of stock. But when the profits which can be

increase of capitals; or, in other words, as stock increases, the quantity of stock to be lent at interest grows gradually greater and greater.

made by the use of a capital are in this manner diminished, as it
were, at both ends, the price which can be paid for the use of it, that

As the quantity of stock to be lent at interest increases, the interest, or the price which must be paid for the use of that stock,

is, the rate of interest, must necessarily be diminished with them.
Mr Locke, Mr Lawe, and Mr Montesquieu, as well as many

necessarily diminishes, not only from those general causes which
make the market price of things commonly diminish as their quan-

other writers, seem to have imagined that the increase of the quantity of gold and silver, in consequence of the discovery of the Span-

tity increases, but from other causes which are peculiar to this
particular case. As capitals increase in any country, the profits which

ish West Indies, was the real cause of the lowering of the rate of
interest through the greater part of Europe. Those metals, they

can be made by employing them necessarily diminish. It becomes
gradually more and more difficult to find within the country a

say, having become of less value themselves, the use of any particular portion of them necessarily became of less value too, and,

profitable method of employing any new capital. There arises, in
consequence, a competition between different capitals, the owner

consequently, the price which could be paid for it. This notion,
which at first sight seems so plausible, has been so fully exposed

of one endeavouring to get possession of that employment which
is occupied by another; but, upon most occasions, he can hope to

by Mr Hume, that it is, perhaps, unnecessary to say any thing
more about it. The following very short and plain argument, how-

justle that other out of this employment by no other means but by
dealing upon more reasonable terms. He must not only sell what

ever, may serve to explain more distinctly the fallacy which seems
to have misled those gentlemen.

he deals in somewhat cheaper, but, in order to get it to sell, he
must sometimes, too, buy it dearer. The demand for productive

Before the discovery of the Spanish West Indies, ten per cent.
seems to have been the common rate of interest through the greater

labour, by the increase of the funds which are destined for main-

part of Europe. It has since that time, in different countries, sunk

289

The Wealth of Nations
to six, five, four, and three per cent. Let us suppose, that in every
particular country the value of silver has sunk precisely in the same

interest which is equal to one fourth only of the value of the former
interest.

proportion as the rate of interest; and that in those countries, for
example, where interest has been reduced from ten to five per

An increase in the quantity of silver, while that of the commodities circulated by means of it remained the same, could have no

cent. the same quantity of silver can now purchase just half the
quantity of goods which it could have purchased before. This sup-

other effect than to diminish the value of that metal. The nominal
value of all sorts of goods would be greater, but their real value

position will not, I believe, be found anywhere agreeable to the
truth; but it is the most favourable to the opinion which we are

would be precisely the same as before. They would be exchanged
for a greater number of pieces of silver; but the quantity of labour

going to examine; and, even upon this supposition, it is utterly
impossible that the lowering of the value of silver could have the

which they could command, the number of people whom they
could maintain and employ, would be precisely the same. The

smallest tendency to lower the rate of interest. If £100 are in those
countries now of no more value than £50 were then, £10 must

capital of the country would be the same, though a greater number of pieces might be requisite for conveying any equal portion

now be of no more value than £5 were then. Whatever were the
causes which lowered the value of the capital, the same must nec-

of it from one hand to another. The deeds of assignment, like the
conveyances of a verbose attorney, would be more cumbersome;

essarily have lowered that of the interest, and exactly in the same
proportion. The proportion between the value of the capital and

but the thing assigned would be precisely the same as before, and
could produce only the same effects. The funds for maintaining

that of the interest must have remained the same, though the rate
had never been altered. By altering the rate, on the contrary, the

productive labour being the same, the demand for it would be the
same. Its price or wages, therefore, though nominally greater, would

proportion between those two values is necessarily altered. If £100
now are worth no more than £50 were then, £5 now can be worth

really be the same. They would be paid in a greater number of
pieces of silver, but they would purchase only the same quantity

no more than £2:10s. were then. By reducing the rate of interest,
therefore, from ten to five per cent. we give for the use of a capital,

of goods. The profits of stock would be the same, both nominally
and really. The wages of labour are commonly computed by the

which is supposed to be equal to one half of its former value, an

quantity of silver which is paid to the labourer. When that is in-

290

Adam Smith
creased, therefore, his wages appear to be increased, though they
may sometimes be no greater than before. But the profits of stock

which it could maintain and employ would be increased, and consequently the demand for that labour. Its wages would naturally

are not computed by the number of pieces of silver with which
they are paid, but by the proportion which those pieces bear to

rise with the demand, and yet might appear to sink. They might
be paid with a smaller quantity of money, but that smaller quan-

the whole capital employed. Thus, in a particular country, 5s. aweek are said to be the common wages of labour, and ten per cent.

tity might purchase a greater quantity of goods than a greater had
done before. The profits of stock would be diminished, both re-

the common profits of stock; but the whole capital of the country
being the same as before, the competition between the different

ally and in appearance. The whole capital of the country being
augmented, the competition between the different capitals of which

capitals of individuals into which it was divided would likewise be
the same. They would all trade with the same advantages and dis-

it was composed would naturally be augmented along with it.
The owners of those particular capitals would be obliged to con-

advantages. The common proportion between capital and profit,
therefore, would be the same, and consequently the common in-

tent themselves with a smaller proportion of the produce of that
labour which their respective capitals employed. The interest of

terest of money; what can commonly be given for the use of money
being necessarily regulated by what can commonly be made by

money, keeping pace always with the profits of stock, might, in
this manner, be greatly diminished, though the value of money, or

the use of it.
Any increase in the quantity of commodities annually circu-

the quantity of goods which any particular sum could purchase,
was greatly augmented.

lated within the country, while that of the money which circulated them remained the same, would, on the contrary, produce

In some countries the interest of money has been prohibited by
law. But as something can everywhere be made by the use of money,

many other important effects, besides that of raising the value of
the money. The capital of the country, though it might nominally

something ought everywhere to be paid for the use of it. This
regulation, instead of preventing, has been found from experience

be the same, would really be augmented. It might continue to be
expressed by the same quantity of money, but it would command

to increase the evil of usury. The debtor being obliged to pay, not
only for the use of the money, but for the risk which his creditor

a greater quantity of labour. The quantity of productive labour

runs by accepting a compensation for that use, he is obliged, if

291

The Wealth of Nations
one may say so, to insure his creditor from the penalties of usury.
In countries where interest is permitted, the law in order to pre-

which was to be lent, would be lent to prodigals and projectors,
who alone would be willing to give this high interest. Sober people,

vent the extortion of usury, generally fixes the highest rate which
can be taken without incurring a penalty. This rate ought always

who will give for the use of money no more than a part of what
they are likely to make by the use of it, would not venture into the

to be somewhat above the lowest market price, or the price which
is commonly paid for the use of money by those who can give the

competition. A great part of the capital of the country would thus
be kept out of the hands which were most likely to make a profit-

most undoubted security. If this legal rate should be fixed below
the lowest market rate, the effects of this fixation must be nearly

able and advantageous use of it, and thrown into those which
were most likely to waste and destroy it. Where the legal rate of

the same as those of a total prohibition of interest. The creditor
will not lend his money for less than the use of it is worth, and the

interest, on the contrary, is fixed but a very little above the lowest
market rate, sober people are universally preferred, as borrowers,

debtor must pay him for the risk which he runs by accepting the
full value of that use. If it is fixed precisely at the lowest market

to prodigals and projectors. The person who lends money gets
nearly as much interest from the former as he dares to take from

price, it ruins, with honest people who respect the laws of their
country, the credit of all those who cannot give the very best secu-

the latter, and his money is much safer in the hands of the one set
of people than in those of the other. A great part of the capital of

rity, and obliges them to have recourse to exorbitant usurers. In a
country such as Great Britain, where money is lent to government

the country is thus thrown into the hands in which it is most
likely to be employed with advantage.

at three per cent. and to private people, upon good security, at
four and four and a-half, the present legal rate, five per cent. is

No law can reduce the common rate of interest below the lowest ordinary market rate at the time when that law is made. Not-

perhaps as proper as any.
The legal rate, it is to be observed, though it ought to be some-

withstanding the edict of 1766, by which the French king attempted to reduce the rate of interest from five to four per cent.

what above, ought not to be much above the lowest market rate.
If the legal rate of interest in Great Britain, for example, was fixed

money continued to be lent in France at five per cent. the law
being evaded in several different ways.

so high as eight or ten per cent. the greater part of the money

The ordinary market price of land, it is to be observed, depends

292

Adam Smith
everywhere upon the ordinary market rate of interest. The person
who has a capital from which he wishes to derive a revenue, with-

CHAPTER V

out taking the trouble to employ it himself, deliberates whether
he should buy land with it, or lend it out at interest. The superior

OF THE DIFFERENT EMPLOYMENTS OF
CAPITALS

security of land, together with some other advantages which almost everywhere attend upon this species of property, will gener-

THOUGH ALL CAPITALS are destined for the maintenance of produc-

ally dispose him to content himself with a smaller revenue from
land, than what he might have by lending out his money at inter-

tive labour only, yet the quantity of that labour which equal capitals are capable of putting into motion, varies extremely according

est. These advantages are sufficient to compensate a certain difference of revenue; but they will compensate a certain difference only;

to the diversity of their employment; as does likewise the value
which that employment adds to the annual produce of the land

and if the rent of land should fall short of the interest of money by
a greater difference, nobody would buy land, which would soon

and labour of the country.
A capital may be employed in four different ways; either, first,

reduce its ordinary price. On the contrary, if the advantages should
much more than compensate the difference, everybody would buy

in procuring the rude produce annually required for the use and
consumption of the society; or, secondly, in manufacturing and

land, which again would soon raise its ordinary price. When interest was at ten per cent. land was commonly sold for ten or

preparing that rude produce for immediate use and consumption;
or, thirdly in transporting either the rude or manufactured pro-

twelve years purchase. As interest sunk to six, five, and four per
cent. the price of land rose to twenty, five-and-twenty, and thirty

duce from the places where they abound to those where they are
wanted; or, lastly, in dividing particular portions of either into

years purchase. The market rate of interest is higher in France
than in England, and the common price of land is lower. In En-

such small parcels as suit the occasional demands of those who
want them. In the first way are employed the capitals of all those

gland it commonly sells at thirty, in France at twenty years purchase.

who undertake improvement or cultivation of lands, mines, or
fisheries; in the second, those of all master manufacturers; in the
third, those of all wholesale merchants; and in the fourth, those of

293

The Wealth of Nations
all retailers. It is difficult to conceive that a capital should be employed in any way which may not be classed under some one or

portions either of the rude or manufactured produce into such
small parcels as suit the occasional demands of those who want

other of those four.
Each of those four methods of employing a capital is essentially

them, every man would be obliged to purchase a greater quantity
of the goods he wanted than his immediate occasions required. If

necessary, either to the existence or extension of the other three, or
to the general conveniency of the society.

there was no such trade as a butcher, for example, every man would
be obliged to purchase a whole ox or a whole sheep at a time. This

Unless a capital was employed in furnishing rude produce to a
certain degree of abundance, neither manufactures nor trade of

would generally be inconvenient to the rich, and much more so to
the poor. If a poor workman was obliged to purchase a month’s or

any kind could exist.
Unless a capital was employed in manufacturing that part of the

six months’ provisions at a time, a great part of the stock which he
employs as a capital in the instruments of his trade, or in the fur-

rude produce which requires a good deal of preparation before it
can be fit for use and consumption, it either would never be pro-

niture of his shop, and which yields him a revenue, he would be
forced to place in that part of his stock which is reserved for im-

duced, because there could be no demand for it; or if it was produced spontaneously, it would be of no value in exchange, and

mediate consumption, and which yields him no revenue. Nothing can be more convenient for such a person than to be able to

could add nothing to the wealth of the society.
Unless a capital was employed in transporting either the rude or

purchase his subsistence from day to day, or even from hour to
hour, as he wants it. He is thereby enabled to employ almost his

manufactured produce from the places where it abounds to those
where it is wanted, no more of either could be produced than was

whole stock as a capital. He is thus enabled to furnish work to a
greater value; and the profit which he makes by it in this way

necessary for the consumption of the neighbourhood. The capital
of the merchant exchanges the surplus produce of one place for

much more than compensates the additional price which the profit
of the retailer imposes upon the goods. The prejudices of some

that of another, and thus encourages the industry, and increases
the enjoyments of both.

political writers against shopkeepers and tradesmen are altogether
without foundation. So far is it from being necessary either to tax

Unless a capital was employed in breaking and dividing certain

them, or to restrict their numbers, that they can never be multi-

294

Adam Smith
plied so as to hurt the public, though they may so as to hurt one
another. The quantity of grocery goods, for example, which can

from other causes, necessarily gives employment to a multitude of
alehouses.

be sold in a particular town, is limited by the demand of that
town and its neighbourhood. The capital, therefore, which can be

The persons whose capitals are employed in any of those four
ways, are themselves productive labourers. Their labour, when

employed in the grocery trade, cannot exceed what is sufficient to
purchase that quantity. If this capital is divided between two dif-

properly directed, fixes and realizes itself in the subject or vendible
commodity upon which it is bestowed, and generally adds to its

ferent grocers, their competition will tend to make both of them
sell cheaper than if it were in the hands of one only; and if it were

price the value at least of their own maintenance and consumption. The profits of the farmer, of the manufacturer, of the mer-

divided among twenty, their competition would be just so much
the greater, and the chance of their combining together, in order

chant, and retailer, are all drawn from the price of the goods which
the two first produce, and the two last buy and sell. Equal capi-

to raise the price, just so much the less. Their competition might,
perhaps, ruin some of themselves; but to take care of this, is the

tals, however, employed in each of those four different ways, will
immediately put into motion very different quantities of produc-

business of the parties concerned, and it may safely be trusted to
their discretion. It can never hurt either the consumer or the pro-

tive labour; and augment, too, in very different proportions, the
value of the annual produce of the land and labour of the society

ducer; on the contrary, it must tend to make the retailers both sell
cheaper and buy dearer, than if the whole trade was monopolized

to which they belong.
The capital of the retailer replaces, together with its profits, that

by one or two persons. Some of them, perhaps, may sometimes
decoy a weak customer to buy what he has no occasion for. This

of the merchant of whom he purchases goods, and thereby enables him to continue his business. The retailer himself is the only

evil, however, is of too little importance to deserve the public attention, nor would it necessarily be prevented by restricting their

productive labourer whom it immediately employs. In his profit
consists the whole value which its employment adds to the annual

numbers. It is not the multitude of alehouses, to give the must
suspicious example, that occasions a general disposition to drunk-

produce of the land and labour of the society.
The capital of the wholesale merchant replaces, together with

enness among the common people; but that disposition, arising

their profits, the capital’s of the farmers and manufacturers of whom

295

The Wealth of Nations
he purchases the rude and manufactured produce which he deals
in, and thereby enables them to continue their respective trades. It

a much greater value to the annual produce of the land and labour
of the society, than an equal capital in the hands of any wholesale

is by this service chiefly that he contributes indirectly to support
the productive labour of the society, and to increase the value of

merchant.
No equal capital puts into motion a greater quantity of produc-

its annual produce. His capital employs, too, the sailors and carriers who transport his goods from one place to another; and it

tive labour than that of the farmer. Not only his labouring servants, but his labouring cattle, are productive labourers. In agri-

augments the price of those goods by the value, not only of his
profits, but of their wages. This is all the productive labour which

culture, too, Nature labours along with man; and though her labour
costs no expense, its produce has its value, as well as that of the

it immediately puts into motion, and all the value which it immediately adds to the annual produce. Its operation in both these

most expensive workmen. The most important operations of agriculture seem intended, not so much to increase, though they do

respects is a good deal superior to that of the capital of the retailer.
Part of the capital of the master manufacturer is employed as a

that too, as to direct the fertility of Nature towards the production
of the plants most profitable to man. A field overgrown with bri-

fixed capital in the instruments of his trade, and replaces, together
with its profits, that of some other artificer of whom he purchases

ars and brambles, may frequently produce as great a quantity of
vegetables as the best cultivated vineyard or corn field. Planting

them. Part of his circulating capital is employed in purchasing
materials, and replaces, with their profits, the capitals of the farm-

and tillage frequently regulate more than they animate the active
fertility of Nature; and after all their labour, a great part of the

ers and miners of whom he purchases them. But a great part of it
is always, either annually, or in a much shorter period, distributed

work always remains to be done by her. The labourers and labouring
cattle, therefore, employed in agriculture, not only occasion, like

among the different workmen whom he employs. It augments the
value of those materials by their wages, and by their masters’ prof-

the workmen in manufactures, the reproduction of a value equal
to their own consumption, or to the capital which employs them,

its upon the whole stock of wages, materials, and instruments of
trade employed in the business. It puts immediately into motion,

together with its owner’s profits, but of a much greater value. Over
and above the capital of the farmer, and all its profits, they regu-

therefore, a much greater quantity of productive labour, and adds

larly occasion the reproduction of the rent of the landlord. This

296

Adam Smith
rent may be considered as the produce of those powers of Nature,
the use of which the landlord lends to the farmer. It is greater or

exceptions to this, belong to resident members of the society.
The capital of a wholesale merchant, on the contrary, seems to

smaller, according to the supposed extent of those powers, or, in
other words, according to the supposed natural or improved fer-

have no fixed or necessary residence anywhere, but may wander
about from place to place, according as it can either buy cheap or

tility of the land. It is the work of Nature which remains, after
deducting or compensating every thing which can be regarded as

sell dear.
The capital of the manufacturer must, no doubt, reside where

the work of man. It is seldom less than a fourth, and frequently
more than a third, of the whole produce. No equal quantity of

the manufacture is carried on; but where this shall be, is not always necessarily determined. It may frequently be at a great dis-

productive labour employed in manufactures, can ever occasion
so great reproduction. In them Nature does nothing; man does

tance, both from the place where the materials grow, and from
that where the complete manufacture is consumed. Lyons is very

all; and the reproduction must always be in proportion to the strength
of the agents that occasion it. The capital employed in agriculture,

distant, both from the places which afford the materials of its manufactures, and from those which consume them. The people of fash-

therefore, not only puts into motion a greater quantity of productive labour than any equal capital employed in manufactures; but in

ion in Sicily are clothed in silks made in other countries, from the
materials which their own produces. Part of the wool of Spain is

proportion, too, to the quantity of productive labour which it employs, it adds a much greater value to the annual produce of the

manufactured in Great Britain, and some part of that cloth is afterwards sent back to Spain.

land and labour of the country, to the real wealth and revenue of its
inhabitants. Of all the ways in which a capital can be employed, it is

Whether the merchant whose capital exports the surplus produce of any society, be a native or a foreigner, is of very little im-

by far the most advantageous to society.
The capitals employed in the agriculture and in the retail trade of

portance. If he is a foreigner, the number of their productive
labourers is necessarily less than if he had been a native, by one

any society, must always reside within that society. Their employment is confined almost to a precise spot, to the farm, and to the

man only; and the value of their annual produce, by the profits of
that one man. The sailors or carriers whom he employs, may still

shop of the retailer. They must generally, too, though there are some

belong indifferently either to his country, or to their country, or to

297

The Wealth of Nations
some third country, in the same manner as if he had been a native.
The capital of a foreigner gives a value to their surplus produce

capitals of those merchants.
A particular country, in the same manner as a particular person,

equally with that of a native, by exchanging it for something for
which there is a demand at home. It as effectually replaces the

may frequently not have capital sufficient both to improve and
cultivate all its lands, to manufacture and prepare their whole rude

capital of the person who produces that surplus, and as effectually
enables him to continue his business, the service by which the

produce for immediate use and consumption, and to transport
the surplus part either of the rude or manufactured produce to

capital of a wholesale merchant chiefly contributes to support the
productive labour, and to augment the value of the annual pro-

those distant markets, where it can be exchanged for something
for which there is a demand at home. The inhabitants of many

duce of the society to which he belongs.
It is of more consequence that the capital of the manufacturer

different parts of Great Britain have not capital sufficient to improve and cultivate all their lands. The wool of the southern coun-

should reside within the country. It necessarily puts into motion a
greater quantity of productive labour, and adds a greater value to

ties of Scotland is, a great part of it, after a long land carriage
through very bad roads, manufactured in Yorkshire, for want of a

the annual produce of the land and labour of the society. It may,
however, be very useful to the country, though it should not reside

capital to manufacture it at home. There are many little manufacturing towns in Great Britain, of which the inhabitants have not

within it. The capitals of the British manufacturers who work up
the flax and hemp annually imported from the coasts of the Bal-

capital sufficient to transport the produce of their own industry
to those distant markets where there is demand and consumption

tic, are surely very useful to the countries which produce them.
Those materials are a part of the surplus produce of those coun-

for it. If there are any merchants among them, they are, properly,
only the agents of wealthier merchants who reside in some of the

tries, which, unless it was annually exchanged for something which
is in demand here, would be of no value, and would soon cease to

great commercial cities.
When the capital of any country is not sufficient for all those

be produced. The merchants who export it, replace the capitals of
the people who produce it, and thereby encourage them to con-

three purposes, in proportion as a greater share of it is employed
in agriculture, the greater will be the quantity of productive labour

tinue the production; and the British manufacturers replace the

which it puts into motion within the country; as will likewise be

298

Adam Smith
the value which its employment adds to the annual produce of the
land and labour of the society. After agriculture, the capital em-

It has been the principal cause of the rapid progress of our American colonies towards wealth and greatness, that almost their whole

ployed in manufactures puts into motion the greatest quantity of
productive labour, and adds the greatest value to the annual pro-

capitals have hitherto been employed in agriculture. They have no
manufactures, those household and coarser manufactures excepted,

duce. That which is employed in the trade of exportation has the
least effect of any of the three.

which necessarily accompany the progress of agriculture, and which
are the work of the women and children in every private family.

The country, indeed, which has not capital sufficient for all those
three purposes, has not arrived at that degree of opulence for which

The greater part, both of the exportation and coasting trade of
America, is carried on by the capitals of merchants who reside in

it seems naturally destined. To attempt, however, prematurely, and
with an insufficient capital, to do all the three, is certainly not the

Great Britain. Even the stores and warehouses from which goods
are retailed in some provinces, particularly in Virginia and Mary-

shortest way for a society, no more than it would be for an individual, to acquire a sufficient one. The capital of all the individu-

land, belong many of them to merchants who reside in the mother
country, and afford one of the few instances of the retail trade of a

als of a nation has its limits, in the same manner as that of a single
individual, and is capable of executing only certain purposes. The

society being carried on by the capitals of those who are not resident members of it. Were the Americans, either by combination,

capital of all the individuals of a nation is increased in the same
manner as that of a single individual, by their continually accu-

or by any other sort of violence, to stop the importation of European manufactures, and, by thus giving a monopoly to such of

mulating and adding to it whatever they save out of their revenue.
It is likely to increase the fastest, therefore, when it is employed in

their own countrymen as could manufacture the like goods, divert any considerable part of their capital into this employment,

the way that affords the greatest revenue to all the inhabitants or
the country, as they will thus be enabled to make the greatest sav-

they would retard, instead of accelerating, the further increase in
the value of their annual produce, and would obstruct, instead of

ings. But the revenue of all the inhabitants of the country is necessarily in proportion to the value of the annual produce of their

promoting, the progress of their country towards real wealth and
greatness. This would be still more the case, were they to attempt,

land and labour.

in the same manner, to monopolize to themselves their whole ex-

299

The Wealth of Nations
portation trade.
The course of human prosperity, indeed, seems scarce ever to

trade in which any part of it is employed.
All wholesale trade, all buying in order to sell again by whole-

have been of so long continuance as to unable any great country
to acquire capital sufficient for all those three purposes; unless,

sale, maybe reduced to three different sorts: the home trade, the
foreign trade of consumption, and the carrying trade. The home

perhaps, we give credit to the wonderful accounts of the wealth
and cultivation of China, of those of ancient Egypt, and of the

trade is employed in purchasing in one part of the same country,
and selling in another, the produce of the industry of that coun-

ancient state of Indostan. Even those three countries, the wealthiest, according to all accounts, that ever were in the world, are

try. It comprehends both the inland and the coasting trade. The
foreign trade of consumption is employed in purchasing foreign

chiefly renowned for their superiority in agriculture and manufactures. They do not appear to have been eminent for foreign

goods for home consumption. The carrying trade is employed in
transacting the commerce of foreign countries, or in carrying the

trade. The ancient Egyptians had a superstitious antipathy to the
sea; a superstition nearly of the same kind prevails among the In-

surplus produce of one to another.
The capital which is employed in purchasing in one part of the

dians; and the Chinese have never excelled in foreign commerce.
The greater part of the surplus produce of all those three countries

country, in order to sell in another, the produce of the industry of
that country, generally replaces, by every such operation, two dis-

seems to have been always exported by foreigners, who gave in
exchange for it something else, for which they found a demand

tinct capitals, that had both been employed in the agriculture or
manufactures of that country, and thereby enables them to con-

there, frequently gold and silver.
It is thus that the same capital will in any country put into mo-

tinue that employment. When it sends out from the residence of
the merchant a certain value of commodities, it generally brings

tion a greater or smaller quantity of productive labour, and add a
greater or smaller value to the annual produce of its land and labour,

hack in return at least an equal value of other commodities. When
both are the produce of domestic industry, it necessarily replaces,

according to the different proportions in which it is employed in
agriculture, manufactures, and wholesale trade. The difference,

by every such operation, two distinct capitals, which had both
been employed in Supporting productive labour, and thereby en-

too, is very great, according to the different sorts of wholesale

ables them to continue that support. The capital which sends

300

Adam Smith
Scotch manufactures to London, and brings back English corn
and manufactures to Edinburgh, necessarily replaces, by every such

capital employed in the foreign trade of consumption has made
one. If the capitals are equal, therefore, the one will give four-and-

operation, two British capitals, which had both been employed in
the agriculture or manufactures of Great Britain.

twenty times more encouragement and support to the industry of
the country than the other.

The capital employed in purchasing foreign goods for home
consumption, when this purchase is made with the produce of

The foreign goods for home consumption may sometimes be
purchased, not with the produce of domestic industry but with

domestic industry, replaces, too, by every such operation, two distinct capitals; but one of them only is employed in supporting

some other foreign goods. These last, however, must have been
purchased, either immediately with the produce of domestic in-

domestic industry. The capital which sends British goods to Portugal, and brings back Portuguese goods to Great Britain, replaces,

dustry, or with something else that had been purchased with it;
for, the case of war and conquest excepted, foreign goods can never

by every such operation, only one British capital. The other is a
Portuguese one. Though the returns, therefore, of the foreign trade

be acquired, but in exchange for something that had been produced at home, either immediately, or after two or more different

of consumption, should be as quick as those of the home trade,
the capital employed in it will give but one half of the encourage-

exchanges. The effects, therefore, of a capital employed in such a
round-about foreign trade of consumption, are, in every respect,

ment to the industry or productive labour of the country.
But the returns of the foreign trade of consumption are very

the same as those of one employed in the most direct trade of the
same kind, except that the final returns are likely to be still more

seldom so quick as those of the home trade. The returns of the
home trade generally come in before the end of the year, and some-

distant, as they must depend upon the returns of two or three
distinct foreign trades. If the hemp and flax of Riga are purchased

times three or four times in the year. The returns of the foreign
trade of consumption seldom come in before the end of the year,

with the tobacco of Virginia, which had been purchased with British manufactures, the merchant must wait for the returns of two

and sometimes not till after two or three years. A capital, therefore, employed in the home trade, will sometimes make twelve

distinct foreign trades, before he can employ the same capital in
repurchasing a like quantity of British manufactures. If the to-

operations, or be sent out and returned twelve times, before a

bacco of Virginia had been purchased, not with British manufac-

301

The Wealth of Nations
tures, but with the sugar and rum of Jamaica, which had been
purchased with those manufactures, he must wait for the returns

essential difference, either in the nature of the trade, or in the
encouragement and support which it can give to the productive

of three. If those two or three distinct foreign trades should happen to be carried on by two or three distinct merchants, of whom

labour of the country from which it is carried on. If they are purchased with the gold of Brazil, for example, or with the silver of

the second buys the goods imported by the first, and the third
buys those imported by the second, in order to export them again,

Peru, this gold and silver, like the tobacco of Virginia, must have
been purchased with something that either was the produce of the

each merchant, indeed, will, in this case, receive the returns of his
own capital more quickly; but the final returns of the whole capi-

industry of the country, or that had been purchased with something else that was so. So far, therefore, as the productive labour of

tal employed in the trade will be just as slow as ever. Whether the
whole capital employed in such a round about trade belong to

the country is concerned, the foreign trade of consumption, which
is carried on by means of gold and silver, has all the advantages

one merchant or to three, can make no difference with regard to
the country, though it may with regard to the particular merchants.

and all the inconveniencies of any other equally round-about foreign trade of consumption; and will replace, just as fast, or just as

Three times a greater capital must in both cases be employed, in
order to exchange a certain value of British manufactures for a

slow, the capital which is immediately employed in supporting
that productive labour. It seems even to have one advantage over

certain quantity of flax and hemp, than would have been necessary, had the manufactures and the flax and hemp been directly

any other equally round-about foreign trade. The transportation
of those metals from one place to another, on account of their

exchanged for one another. The whole capital employed, therefore, in such a round-about foreign trade of consumption, will

small bulk and great value, is less expensive than that of almost
any other foreign goods of equal value. Their freight is much less,

generally give less encouragement and support to the productive
labour of the country, than an equal capital employed in a more

and their insurance not greater; and no goods, besides, are less
liable to suffer by the carriage. An equal quantity of foreign goods,

direct trade of the same kind.
Whatever be the foreign commodity with which the foreign

therefore, may frequently be purchased with a smaller quantity of
the produce of domestic industry, by the intervention of gold and

goods for home consumption are purchased, it can occasion no

silver, than by that of any other foreign goods. The demand of the

302

Adam Smith
country may frequently, in this manner, be supplied more completely, and at a smaller expense, than in any other. Whether, by the

that have had any considerable share of the carrying trade have, in
fact, carried it on in this manner. The trade itself has probably

continual exportation of those metals, a trade of this kind is likely
to impoverish the country from which it is carried on in any other

derived its name from it, the people of such countries being the
carriers to other countries. It does not, however, seem essential to

way, I shall have occasion to examine at great length hereafter.
That part of the capital of any country which is employed in the

the nature of the trade that it should be so. A Dutch merchant
may, for example, employ his capital in transacting the commerce

carrying trade, is altogether withdrawn from supporting the productive labour of that particular country, to support that of some

of Poland and Portugal, by carrying part of the surplus produce of
the one to the other, not in Dutch, but in British bottoms. It

foreign countries. Though it may replace, by every operation, two
distinct capitals, yet neither of them belongs to that particular

maybe presumed, that he actually does so upon some particular
occasions. It is upon this account, however, that the carrying trade

country. The capital of the Dutch merchant, which carries the
corn of Poland to Portugal, and brings back the fruits and wines

has been supposed peculiarly advantageous to such a country as
Great Britain, of which the defence and security depend upon the

of Portugal to Poland, replaces by every such operation two capitals, neither of which had been employed in supporting the pro-

number of its sailors and shipping. But the same capital may employ as many sailors and shipping, either in the foreign trade of

ductive labour of Holland; but one of them in supporting that of
Poland, and the other that of Portugal. The profits only return

consumption, or even in the home trade, when carried on by coasting vessels, as it could in the carrying trade. The number of sailors

regularly to Holland, and constitute the whole addition which
this trade necessarily makes to the annual produce of the land and

and shipping which any particular capital can employ, does not
depend upon the nature of the trade, but partly upon the bulk of

labour of that country. When, indeed, the carrying trade of any
particular country is carried on with the ships and sailors of that

the goods, in proportion to their value, and partly upon the distance of the ports between which they are to be carried; chiefly

country, that part of the capital employed in it which pays the
freight is distributed among, and puts into motion, a certain num-

upon the former of those two circumstances. The coal trade from
Newcastle to London, for example, employs more shipping than

ber of productive labourers of that country. Almost all nations

all the carrying trade of England, though the ports are at no great

303

The Wealth of Nations
distance. To force, therefore, by extraordinary encouragements, a
larger share of the capital of any country into the carrying trade,

advantageous, but necessary and unavoidable, when the course of
things, without any constraint or violence, naturally introduces it.

than what would naturally go to it, will not always necessarily
increase the shipping of that country.

When the produce of any particular branch of industry exceeds
what the demand of the country requires, the surplus must be

The capital, therefore, employed in the home trade of any country, will generally give encouragement and support to a greater

sent abroad, and exchanged for something for which there is a
demand at home. Without such exportation, a part of the pro-

quantity of productive labour in that country, and increase the
value of its annual produce, more than an equal capital employed

ductive labour of the country must cease, and the value of its annual produce diminish. The land and labour of Great Britain pro-

in the foreign trade of consumption; and the capital employed in
this latter trade has, in both these respects, a still greater advantage

duce generally more corn, woollens, and hardware, than the demand of the home market requires. The surplus part of them,

over an equal capital employed in the carrying trade. The riches,
and so far as power depends upon riches, the power of every country

therefore, must be sent abroad, and exchanged for something for
which there is a demand at home. It is only by means of such

must always be in proportion to the value of its annual produce,
the fund from which all taxes must ultimately be paid. But the

exportation, that this surplus can acquired value sufficient to compensate the labour and expense of producing it. The

great object of the political economy of every country, is to increase the riches and power of that country. It ought, therefore, to

neighbourhood of the sea-coast, and the banks of all navigable
rivers, are advantageous situations for industry, only because they

give no preference nor superior encouragement to the foreign trade
of consumption above the home trade, nor to the carrying trade

facilitate the exportation and exchange of such surplus produce
for something else which is more in demand there.

above either of the other two. It ought neither to force nor to
allure into either of those two channels a greater share of the capi-

When the foreign goods which are thus purchased with the surplus produce of domestic industry exceed the demand of the home

tal of the country, than what would naturally flow into them of its
own accord.

market, the surplus part of them must be sent abroad again, and
exchanged for something more in demand at home. About 96,000

Each of those different branches of trade, however, is not only

hogsheads of tobacco are annually purchased in Virginia and Mary-

304

Adam Smith
land with a part of the surplus produce of British industry. But
the demand of Great Britain does not require, perhaps, more than

symptom for the cause. Holland, in proportion to the extent of
the land and the number of it’s inhabitants, by far the richest coun-

14,000. If the remaining 82,000, therefore, could not be sent
abroad, and exchanged for something more in demand at home,

try in Europe, has accordingly the greatest share of the carrying
trade of Europe. England, perhaps the second richest country of

the importation of them must cease immediately, and with it the
productive labour of all those inhabitants of Great Britain who

Europe, is likewise supposed to have a considerable share in it;
though what commonly passes for the carrying trade of England

are at present employed in preparing the goods with which these
82,000 hogsheads are annually purchased. Those goods, which

will frequently, perhaps, be found to be no more than a roundabout foreign trade of consumption. Such are, in a great measure,

are part of the produce of the land and labour of Great Britain,
having no market at home, and being deprived of that which they

the trades which carry the goods of the East and West Indies and
of America to the different European markets. Those goods are

had abroad, must cease to be produced. The most round-about
foreign trade of consumption, therefore, may, upon some occa-

generally purchased, either immediately with the produce of British industry, or with something else which had been purchased

sions, be as necessary for supporting the productive labour of the
country, and the value of its annual produce, as the most direct.

with that produce, and the final returns of those trades are generally used or consumed in Great Britain. The trade which is carried

When the capital stock of any country is increased to such a
degree that it cannot be all employed in supplying the consump-

on in British bottoms between the different ports of the Mediterranean, and some trade of the same kind carried on by British

tion, and supporting the productive labour of that particular country, the surplus part of it naturally disgorges itself into the carrying

merchants between the different ports of India, make, perhaps,
the principal branches of what is properly the carrying trade of

trade, and is employed in performing the same offices to other
countries. The carrying trade is the natural effect and symptom of

Great Britain.
The extent of the home trade, and of the capital which can be

great national wealth; but it does not seem to be the natural cause
of it. Those statesmen who have been disposed to favour it with

employed in it, is necessarily limited by the value of the surplus
produce of all those distant places within the country which have

particular encouragement, seem to have mistaken the effect and

occasion to exchange their respective productions with one an-

305

The Wealth of Nations
other; that of the foreign trade of consumption, by the value of the
surplus produce of the whole country, and of what can be pur-

particular discussion of their calculations, a very simple observation may satisfy us that the result of them must be false. We see,

chased with it; that of the carrying trade, by the value of the surplus
produce of all the different countries in the world. Its possible ex-

every day, the most splendid fortunes, that have been acquired in
the course of a single life, by trade and manufactures, frequently

tent, therefore, is in a manner infinite in comparison of that of the
other two, and is capable of absorbing the greatest capitals.

from a very small capital, sometimes from no capital. A single
instance of such a fortune, acquired by agriculture in the same

The consideration of his own private profit is the sole motive
which determines the owner of any capital to employ it either in

time, and from such a capital, has not, perhaps, occurred in Europe, during the course of the present century. In all the great

agriculture, in manufactures, or in some particular branch of the
wholesale or retail trade. The different quantities of productive

countries of Europe, however, much good land still remains uncultivated; and the greater part of what is cultivated, is far from

labour which it may put into motion, and the different values
which it may add to the annual produce of the land and labour of

being improved to the degree of which it is capable. Agriculture,
therefore, is almost everywhere capable of absorbing a much greater

the society, according as it is employed in one or other of those
different ways, never enter into his thoughts. In countries, there-

capital than has ever yet been employed in it. What circumstances
in the policy of Europe have given the trades which are carried on

fore, where agriculture is the most profitable of all employments,
and farming and improving the most direct roads to a splendid

in towns so great an advantage over that which is carried on in the
country, that private persons frequently find it more for their ad-

fortune, the capitals of individuals will naturally be employed in
the manner most advantageous to the whole society. The profits

vantage to employ their capitals in the most distant carrying trades
of Asia and America than in the improvement and cultivation of

of agriculture, however, seem to have no superiority over those of
other employments in any part of Europe. Projectors, indeed, in

the most fertile fields in their own neighbourhood, I shall endeavour to explain at full length in the two following books.

every corner of it, have, within these few years, amused the public
with most magnificent accounts of the profits to be made by the
cultivation and improvement of land. Without entering into any

306

Adam Smith

BOOK III

cal, and the division of labour is in this, as in all other cases, advantageous to all the different persons employed in the various

OF THE DIFFERENT PROGRESS OF
OPULENCE IN DIFFERENT NATIONS

occupations into which it is subdivided. The inhabitants of the
country purchase of the town a greater quantity of manufactured

CHAPTER I
OF THE NATURAL PROGRESS OF OPULENCE

T

HE GREAT COMMERCE of every civilized society is that car

ried on between the inhabitants of the town and those
of the country. It consists in the exchange of rude for

manufactured produce, either immediately, or by the intervention of money, or of some sort of paper which represents money.
The country supplies the town with the means of subsistence and
the materials of manufacture. The town repays this supply, by
sending back a part of the manufactured produce to the inhabitants of the country. The town, in which there neither is nor can be
any reproduction of substances, may very properly be said to gain
its whole wealth and subsistence from the country. We must not,
however, upon this account, imagine that the gain of the town is
the loss of the country. The gains of both are mutual and recipro-

goods with the produce of a much smaller quantity of their own
labour, than they must have employed had they attempted to prepare them themselves. The town affords a market for the surplus
produce of the country, or what is over and above the maintenance of the cultivators; and it is there that the inhabitants of the
country exchange it for something else which is in demand among
them. The greater the number and revenue of the inhabitants of
the town, the more extensive is the market which it affords to
those of the country; and the more extensive that market, it is
always the more advantageous to a great number. The corn which
grows within a mile of the town, sells there for the same price with
that which comes from twenty miles distance. But the price of the
latter must, generally, not only pay the expense of raising it and
bringing it to market, but afford, too, the ordinary profits of agriculture to the farmer. The proprietors and cultivators of the country, therefore, which lies in the neighbourhood of the town, over
and above the ordinary profits of agriculture, gain, in the price of
what they sell, the whole value of the carriage of the like produce
that is brought from more distant parts; and they save, besides,

307

The Wealth of Nations
the whole value of this carriage in the price of what they buy.
Compare the cultivation of the lands in the neighbourhood of

in different ages and nations.
That order of things which necessity imposes, in general, though

any considerable town, with that of those which lie at some distance from it, and you will easily satisfy yourself bow much the

not in every particular country, is in every particular country promoted by the natural inclinations of man. If human institutions

country is benefited by the commerce of the town. Among all the
absurd speculations that have been propagated concerning the

had never thwarted those natural inclinations, the towns could
nowhere have increased beyond what the improvement and culti-

balance of trade, it has never been pretended that either the country loses by its commerce with the town, or the town by that with

vation of the territory in which they were situated could support;
till such time, at least, as the whole of that territory was com-

the country which maintains it.
As subsistence is, in the nature of things, prior to conveniency

pletely cultivated and improved. Upon equal, or nearly equal profits, most men will choose to employ their capitals, rather in the

and luxury, so the industry which procures the former, must necessarily be prior to that which ministers to the latter. The cultiva-

improvement and cultivation of land, than either in manufactures
or in foreign trade. The man who employs his capital in land, has

tion and improvement of the country, therefore, which affords
subsistence, must, necessarily, be prior to the increase of the town,

it more under his view and command; and his fortune is much
less liable to accidents than that of the trader, who is obliged fre-

which furnishes only the means of conveniency and luxury. It is
the surplus produce of the country only, or what is over and above

quently to commit it, not only to the winds and the waves, but to
the more uncertain elements of human folly and injustice, by giv-

the maintenance of the cultivators, that constitutes the subsistence
of the town, which can therefore increase only with the increase of

ing great credits, in distant countries, to men with whose character and situation he can seldom be thoroughly acquainted. The

the surplus produce. The town, indeed, may not always derive its
whole subsistence from the country in its neighbourhood, or even

capital of the landlord, on the contrary, which is fixed in the improvement of his land, seems to be as well secured as the nature of

from the territory to which it belongs, but from very distant countries; and this, though it forms no exception from the general rule,

human affairs can admit of. The beauty of the country, besides,
the pleasure of a country life, the tranquillity of mind which it

has occasioned considerable variations in the progress of opulence

promises, and, wherever the injustice of human laws does not dis-

308

Adam Smith
turb it, the independency which it really affords, have charms that,
more or less, attract everybody; and as to cultivate the ground was

they sell to the inhabitants of the country, necessarily regulates the
quantity of the materials and provisions which they buy. Neither

the original destination of man, so, in every stage of his existence,
he seems to retain a predilection for this primitive employment.

their employment nor subsistence, therefore, can augment, but in
proportion to the augmentation of the demand from the country

Without the assistance of some artificers, indeed, the cultivation of land cannot be carried on, but with great inconveniency

for finished work; and this demand can augment only in proportion to the extension of improvement and cultivation. Had hu-

and continual interruption. Smiths, carpenters, wheelwrights and
ploughwrights, masons and bricklayers, tanners, shoemakers, and

man institutions, therefore, never disturbed the natural course of
things, the progressive wealth and increase of the towns would, in

tailors, are people whose service the farmer has frequent occasion
for. Such artificers, too, stand occasionally in need of the assis-

every political society, be consequential, and in proportion to the
improvement and cultivation of the territory of country.

tance of one another; and as their residence is not, like that of the
farmer, necessarily tied down to a precise spot, they naturally settle

In our North American colonies, where uncultivated land is still
to be had upon easy terms, no manufactures for distant sale have

in the neighbourhood of one another, and thus form a small town
or village. The butcher, the brewer, and the baker, soon join them,

ever yet been established in any of their towns. When an artificer
has acquired a little more stock than is necessary for carrying on

together with many other artificers and retailers, necessary or useful for supplying their occasional wants, and who contribute still

his own business in supplying the neighbouring country, he does
not, in North America, attempt to establish with it a manufacture

further to augment the town. The inhabitants of the town, and
those of the country, are mutually the servants of one another.

for more distant sale, but employs it in the purchase and improvement of uncultivated land. From artificer he becomes planter; and

The town is a continual fair or market, to which the inhabitants
of the country resort, in order to exchange their rude for manu-

neither the large wages nor the easy subsistence which that country affords to artificers, can bribe him rather to work for other

factured produce. It is this commerce which supplies the inhabitants of the town, both with the materials of their work, and the

people than for himself. He feels that an artificer is the servant of
his customers, from whom he derives his subsistence; but that a

means of their subsistence. The quantity of the finished work which

planter who cultivates his own land, and derives his necessary sub-

309

The Wealth of Nations
sistence from the labour of his own family, is really a master, and
independent of all the world.

capital which carries this surplus produce abroad be a foreign or a
domestic one, is of very little importance. If the society has not

In countries, on the contrary, where there is either no uncultivated land, or none that can be had upon easy terms, every artifi-

acquired sufficient capital, both to cultivate all its lands, and to
manufacture in the completest manner the whole of its rude pro-

cer who has acquired more stock than he can employ in the occasional jobs of the neighbourhood, endeavours to prepare work for

duce, there is even a considerable advantage that the rude produce
should be exported by a foreign capital, in order that the whole

more distant sale. The smith erects some sort of iron, the weaver
some sort of linen or woollen manufactory. Those different manu-

stock of the society may be employed in more useful purposes.
The: wealth of ancient Egypt, that of China and Indostan, suffi-

factures come, in process of time, to be gradually subdivided, and
thereby improved and refined in a great variety of ways, which

ciently demonstrate that a nation may attain a very high degree of
opulence, though the greater part of its exportation trade be car-

may easily be conceived, and which it is therefore unnecessary to
explain any farther.

ried on by foreigners. The progress of our North American and
West Indian colonies, would have been much less rapid, had no

In seeking for employment to a capital, manufactures are, upon
equal or nearly equal profits, naturally preferred to foreign com-

capital but what belonged to themselves been employed in exporting their surplus produce.

merce, for the same reason that agriculture is naturally preferred
to manufactures. As the capital of the landlord or farmer is more

According to the natural course of things, therefore, the greater
part of the capital of every growing society is, first, directed to

secure than that of the manufacturer, so the capital of the manufacturer, being at all times more within his view and command, is

agriculture, afterwards to manufactures, and, last of all, to foreign
commerce. This order of things is so very natural, that in every

more secure than that of the foreign merchant. In every period,
indeed, of every society, the surplus part both of the rude and

society that had any territory, it has always, I believe, been in some
degree observed. Some of their lands must have been cultivated

manufactured produce, or that for which there is no demand at
home, must be sent abroad, in order to be exchanged for some-

before any considerable towns could be established, and some sort
of coarse industry of the manufacturing kind must have been car-

thing for which there is some demand at home. But whether the

ried on in those towns, before they could well think of employing

310

Adam Smith
themselves in foreign commerce.
But though this natural order of things must have taken place

CHAPTER II

in some degree in every such society, it has, in all the modern
states of Europe, been in many respects entirely inverted. The foreign commerce of some of their cities has introduced all their finer
manufactures, or such as were fit for distant sale; and manufac-

OF THE DISCOURAGEMENT OF AGRICULTURE IN THE ANCIENT STATE OF
EUROPE, AFTER THE FALL OF THE ROMAN EMPIRE

tures and foreign commerce together have given birth to the principal improvements of agriculture. The manners and customs

WHEN THE GERMAN and Scythian nations overran the western prov-

which the nature of their original government introduced, and
which remained after that government was greatly altered, neces-

inces of the Roman empire, the confusions which followed so great
a revolution lasted for several centuries. The rapine and violence

sarily forced them into this unnatural and retrograde order.

which the barbarians exercised against the ancient inhabitants,
interrupted the commerce between the towns and the country.
The towns were deserted, and the country was left uncultivated;
and the western provinces of Europe, which had enjoyed a considerable degree of opulence under the Roman empire, sunk into
the lowest state of poverty and barbarism. During the continuance of those confusions, the chiefs and principal leaders of those
nations acquired, or usurped to themselves, the greater part of the
lands of those countries. A great part of them was uncultivated;
but no part of them, whether cultivated or uncultivated, was left
without a proprietor. All of them were engrossed, and the greater
part by a few great proprietors.
This original engrossing of uncultivated lands, though a great,

311

The Wealth of Nations
might have been but a transitory evil. They might soon have been
divided again, and broke into small parcels, either by succession

oppressed and swallowed up by the incursions of its neighbours.
The law of primogeniture, therefore, came to take place, not im-

or by alienation. The law of primogeniture hindered them from
being divided by succession; the introduction of entails prevented

mediately indeed, but in process of time, in the succession of landed
estates, for the same reason that it has generally taken place in that

their being broke into small parcels by alienation.
When land, like moveables, is considered as the means only of

of monarchies, though not always at their first institution. That
the power, and consequently the security of the monarchy, may

subsistence and enjoyment, the natural law of succession divides
it, like them, among all the children of the family; of all of whom

not be weakened by division, it must descend entire to one of the
children. To which of them so important a preference shall be

the subsistence and enjoyment may be supposed equally dear to
the father. This natural law of succession, accordingly, took place

given, must be determined by some general rule, founded not
upon the doubtful distinctions of personal merit, but upon some

among the Romans who made no more distinction between elder
and younger, between male and female, in the inheritance of lands,

plain and evident difference which can admit of no dispute. Among
the children of the same family there can be no indisputable dif-

than we do in the distribution of moveables. But when land was
considered as the means, not of subsistence merely, but of power

ference but that of sex, and that of age. The male sex is universally
preferred to the female; and when all other things are equal, the

and protection, it was thought better that it should descend undivided to one. In those disorderly times, every great landlord was a

elder everywhere takes place of the younger. Hence the origin of
the right of primogeniture, and of what is called lineal succession.

sort of petty prince. His tenants were his subjects. He was their
judge, and in some respects their legislator in peace and their leader

Laws frequently continue in force long after the circumstances
which first gave occasion to them, and which could alone render

in war. He made war according to his own discretion, frequently
against his neighbours, and sometimes against his sovereign. The

them reasonable, are no more. In the present state of Europe, the
proprietor of a single acre of land is as perfectly secure in his pos-

security of a landed estate, therefore, the protection which its owner
could afford to those who dwelt on it, depended upon its great-

session as the proprietor of 100,000. The right of primogeniture,
however, still continues to be respected; and as of all institutions it

ness. To divide it was to ruin it, and to expose every part of it to be

is the fittest to support the pride of family distinctions, it is still

312

Adam Smith
likely to endure for many centuries. In every other respect, nothing can be more contrary to the real interest of a numerous family,

right to the earth, and to all that it possesses; but that the property
of the present generation should be restrained and regulated ac-

than a right which, in order to enrich one, beggars all the rest of
the children.

cording to the fancy of those who died, perhaps five hundred years
ago. Entails, however, are still respected, through the greater part

Entails are the natural consequences of the law of primogeniture. They were introduced to preserve a certain lineal succession,

of Europe; In those countries, particularly, in which noble birth is
a necessary qualification for the enjoyment either of civil or mili-

of which the law of primogeniture first gave the idea, and to hinder
any part of the original estate from being carried out of the pro-

tary honours. Entails are thought necessary for maintaining this
exclusive privilege of the nobility to the great offices and honours

posed line, either by gift, or device, or alienation; either by the
folly, or by the misfortune of any of its successive owners. They

of their country; and that order having usurped one unjust advantage over the rest of their fellow-citizens, lest their poverty should

were altogether unknown to the Romans. Neither their substitutions, nor fidei commisses, bear any resemblance to entails, though

render it ridiculous, it is thought reasonable that they should have
another. The common law of England, indeed, is said to abhor

some French lawyers have thought proper to dress the modern
institution in the language and garb of those ancient ones.

perpetuities, and they are accordingly more restricted there than
in any other European monarchy; though even England is not

When great landed estates were a sort of principalities, entails
might not be unreasonable. Like what are called the fundamental

altogether without them. In Scotland, more than one fifth, perhaps more than one third part of the whole lands in the country,

laws of some monarchies, they might frequently hinder the security of thousands from being endangered by the caprice or ex-

are at present supposed to be under strict entail.
Great tracts of uncultivated land were in this manner not only

travagance of one man. But in the present state of Europe, when
small as well as great estates derive their security from the laws of

engrossed by particular families, but the possibility of their being
divided again was as much as possible precluded for ever. It sel-

their country, nothing can be more completely absurd. They are
founded upon the most absurd of all suppositions, the supposi-

dom happens, however, that a great proprietor is a great improver.
In the disorderly times which gave birth to those barbarous insti-

tion that every successive generation of men have not an equal

tutions, the great proprietor was sufficiently employed in defend-

313

The Wealth of Nations
ing his own territories, or in extending his jurisdiction and authority over those of his neighbours. He had no leisure to attend

estate in the same manner, and he has little taste for any other, he
would be a bankrupt before he had finished the tenth part of it.

to the cultivation and improvement of land. When the establishment of law and order afforded him this leisure, he often wanted

There still remain, in both parts of the united kingdom, some
great estates which have continued, without interruption, in the

the inclination, and almost always the requisite abilities. If the
expense of his house and person either equalled or exceeded his

hands of the same family since the times of feudal anarchy. Compare the present condition of those estates with the possessions of

revenue, as it did very frequently, he had no stock to employ in
this manner. If he was an economist, he generally found it more

the small proprietors in their neighbourhood, and you will require no other argument to convince you how unfavourable such

profitable to employ his annual savings in new purchases than in
the improvement of his old estate. To improve land with profit,

extensive property is to improvement.
If little improvement was to be expected from such great pro-

like all other commercial projects, requires an exact attention to
small savings and small gains, of which a man born to a great

prietors, still less was to be hoped for from those who occupied
the land under them. In the ancient state of Europe, the occupiers

fortune, even though naturally frugal, is very seldom capable. The
situation of such a person naturally disposes him to attend rather

of land were all tenants at will. They were all, or almost all, slaves,
but their slavery was of a milder kind than that known among the

to ornament, which pleases his fancy, than to profit, for which he
has so little occasion. The elegance of his dress, of his equipage, of

ancient Greeks and Romans, or even in our West Indian colonies.
They were supposed to belong more directly to the land than to

his house and household furniture, are objects which, from his
infancy, he has been accustomed to have some anxiety about. The

their master. They could, therefore, be sold with it, but not separately. They could marry, provided it was with the consent of their

turn of mind which this habit naturally forms, follows him when
he comes to think of the improvement of land. He embellishes,

master; and he could not afterwards dissolve the marriage by selling the man and wife to different persons. If he maimed or mur-

perhaps, four or five hundred acres in the neighbourhood of his
house, at ten times the expense which the land is worth after all

dered any of them, he was liable to some penalty, though generally but to a small one. They were not, however, capable of acquir-

his improvements; and finds, that if he was to improve his whole

ing property. Whatever they acquired was acquired to their mas-

314

Adam Smith
ter, and he could take it from them at pleasure. Whatever cultivation and improvement could be carried on by means of such slaves,

marked both by Pliny and Columella. In the time of Aristotle, it
had not been much better in ancient Greece. Speaking of the ideal

was properly carried on by their master. It was at his expense. The
seed, the cattle, and the instruments of husbandry, were all his. It

republic described in the laws of Plato, to maintain 5000 idle men
(the number of warriors supposed necessary for its defence), to-

was for his benefit. Such slaves could acquire nothing but their
daily maintenance. It was properly the proprietor himself, there-

gether with their women and servants, would require, he says, a
territory of boundless extent and fertility, like the plains of Babylon.

fore, that in this case occupied his own lands, and cultivated them
by his own bondmen. This species of slavery still subsists in Rus-

The pride of man makes him love to domineer, and nothing
mortifies him so much as to be obliged to condescend to persuade

sia, Poland, Hungary, Bohemia, Moravia, and other parts of Germany. It is only in the western and south-western provinces of

his inferiors. Wherever the law allows it, and the nature of the
work can afford it, therefore, he will generally prefer the service of

Europe that it has gradually been abolished altogether.
But if great improvements are seldom to be expected from great

slaves to that of freemen. The planting of sugar and tobacco can
afford the expense of slave cultivation. The raising of corn, it seems,

proprietors, they are least of all to be expected when they employ
slaves for their workmen. The experience of all ages and nations, I

in the present times, cannot. In the English colonies, of which the
principal produce is corn, the far greater part of the work is done

believe, demonstrates that the work done by slaves, though it appears to cost only their maintenance, is in the end the dearest of

by freemen. The late resolution of the Quakers in Pennsylvania,
to set at liberty all their negro slaves, may satisfy us that their

any. A person who can acquire no property can have no other
interest but to eat as much and to labour as little as possible.

number cannot be very great. Had they made any considerable
part of their property, such a resolution could never have been

Whatever work he does beyond what is sufficient to purchase his
own maintenance, can be squeezed out of him by violence only,

agreed to. In our sugar colonies., on the contrary, the whole work
is done by slaves, and in our tobacco colonies a very great part of

and not by any interest of his own. In ancient Italy, how much the
cultivation of corn degenerated, how unprofitable it became to

it. The profits of a sugar plantation in any of our West Indian
colonies, are generally much greater than those of any other culti-

the master, when it fell under the management of slaves, is re-

vation that is known either in Europe or America; and the profits

315

The Wealth of Nations
of a tobacco plantation, though inferior to those of sugar, are superior to those of corn, as has already been observed. Both can

sible, in order that their own proportion may be so. A slave, on
the contrary, who can acquire nothing but his maintenance, con-

afford the expense of slave cultivation but sugar can afford it still
better than tobacco. The number of negroes, accordingly, is much

sults his own ease, by making the land produce as little as possible
over and above that maintenance. It is probable that it was partly

greater, in proportion to that of whites, in our sugar than in our
tobacco colonies.

upon account of this advantage, and partly upon account of the
encroachments which the sovereigns, always jealous of the great

To the slave cultivators of ancient times gradually succeeded a
species of farmers, known at present in France by the name of

lords, gradually encouraged their villains to make upon their authority, and which seem, at least, to have been such as rendered

metayers. They are called in Latin Coloni Partiarii. They have been
so long in disuse in England, that at present I know no English

this species of servitude altogether inconvenient, that tenure in
villanage gradually wore out through the greater part of Europe.

name for them. The proprietor furnished them with the seed, cattle,
and instruments of husbandry, the whole stock, in short, neces-

The time and manner, however, in which so important a revolution was brought about, is one of the most obscure points in mod-

sary for cultivating the farm. The produce was divided equally
between the proprietor and the farmer, after setting aside what

ern history. The church of Rome claims great merit in it; and it is
certain, that so early as the twelfth century, Alexander III. pub-

was judged necessary for keeping up the stock, which was restored
to the proprietor, when the farmer either quitted or was turned

lished a bull for the general emancipation of slaves. It seems, however, to have been rather a pious exhortation, than a law to which

out of the farm.
Land occupied by such tenants is properly cultivated at the ex-

exact obedience was required from the faithful. Slavery continued
to take place almost universally for several centuries afterwards,

pense of the proprietors, as much as that occupied by slaves. There
is, however, one very essential difference between them. Such ten-

till it was gradually abolished by the joint operation of the two
interests above mentioned; that of the proprietor on the one hand,

ants, being freemen, are capable of acquiring property; and having a certain proportion of the produce of the land, they have a

and that of the sovereign on the other. A villain, enfranchised, and
at the same time allowed to continue in possession of the land,

plain interest that the whole produce should be as great as pos-

having no stock of his own, could cultivate it only by means of

316

Adam Smith
what the landlord advanced to him, and must therefore have been
what the French call a metayer.

same kind.
To this species of tenantry succeeded, though by very slow de-

It could never, however, be the interest even of this last species
of cultivators, to lay out, in the further improvement of the land,

grees, farmers, properly so called, who cultivated the land with
their own stock, paying a rent certain to the landlord. When such

any part of the little stock which they might save from their own
share of the produce; because the landlord, who laid out nothing,

farmers have a lease for a term of years, they may sometimes find
it for their interest to lay out part of their capital in the further

was to get one half of whatever it produced. The tithe, which is
but a tenth of the produce, is found to be a very great hindrance

improvement of the farm; because they may sometimes expect to
recover it, with a large profit, before the expiration of the lease.

to improvement. A tax, therefore, which amounted to one half,
must have been an effectual bar to it. It might be the interest of a

The possession, even of such farmers, however, was long extremely
precarious, and still is so in many parts of Europe. They could,

metayer to make the land produce as much as could be brought
out of it by means of the stock furnished by the proprietor; but it

before the expiration of their term, be legally ousted of their leases
by a new purchaser; in England, even, by the fictitious action of a

could never be his interest to mix any part of his own with it. In
France, where five parts out of six of the whole kingdom are said

common recovery. If they were turned out illegally by the violence
of their master, the action by which they obtained redress was

to be still occupied by this species of cultivators, the proprietors
complain, that their metayers take every opportunity of employ-

extremely imperfect. It did not always reinstate them in the possession of the land, but gave them damages, which never amounted

ing their master’s cattle rather in carriage than in cultivation; because, in the one case, they get the whole profits to themselves, in

to a real loss. Even in England, the country, perhaps of Europe,
where the yeomanry has always been most respected, it was not

the other they share them with their landlord. This species of tenants still subsists in some parts of Scotland. They are called steel-

till about the 14th of Henry VII. that the action of ejectment was
invented, by which the tenant recovers, not damages only, but

bow tenants. Those ancient English tenants, who are said by ChiefBaron Gilbert and Dr Blackstone to have been rather bailiffs of

possession, and in which his claim is not necessarily concluded by
the uncertain decision of a single assize. This action has been found

the landlord than farmers, properly so called, were probably of the

so effectual a remedy, that, in the modern practice, when the land-

317

The Wealth of Nations
lord has occasion to sue for the possession of the land, he seldom
makes use of the actions which properly belong to him as a land-

late act of parliament has, in this respect, somewhat slackened
their fetters, though they are still by much too strait. In Scotland,

lord, the writ of right or the writ of entry, but sues in the name of
his tenant, by the writ of ejectment. In England, therefore the

besides, as no leasehold gives a vote for a member of parliament,
the yeomanry are upon this account less respectable to their land-

security of the tenant is equal to that of the proprietor. In England, besides, a lease for life of forty shillings a-year value is a

lords than in England.
In other parts of Europe, after it was found convenient to secure

freehold, and entitles the lessee to a vote for a member of parliament; and as a great part of the yeomanry have freeholds of this

tenants both against heirs and purchasers, the term of their security was still limited to a very short period; in France, for example,

kind, the whole order becomes respectable to their landlords, on
account of the political consideration which this gives them. There

to nine years from the commencement of the lease. It has in that
country, indeed, been lately extended to twentyseven, a period

is, I believe, nowhere in Europe, except in England, any instance
of the tenant building upon the land of which he had no lease,

still too short to encourage the tenant to make the most important improvements. The proprietors of land were anciently the

and trusting that the honour of his landlord would take no advantage of so important an improvement. Those laws and customs,

legislators of every part of Europe. The laws relating to land, therefore, were all calculated for what they supposed the interest of the

so favourable to the yeomanry, have perhaps contributed more to
the present grandeur of England, than all their boasted regula-

proprietor. It was for his interest, they had imagined, that no lease
granted by any of his predecessors should hinder him from enjoy-

tions of commerce taken together.
The law which secures the longest leases against successors of

ing, during a long term of years, the full value of his land. Avarice
and injustice are always short-sighted, and they did not foresee

every kind, is, so far as I know, peculiar to Great Britain. It was
introduced into Scotland so early as 1449, by a law of James II. Its

how much this regulation must obstruct improvement, and thereby
hurt, in the long-run, the real interest of the landlord.

beneficial influence, however, has been much obstructed by entails; the heirs of entail being generally restrained from letting leases

The farmers, too, besides paying the rent, were anciently, it was
supposed, bound to perform a great number of services to the

for any long term of years, frequently for more than one year. A

landlord, which were seldom either specified in the lease, or regu-

318

Adam Smith
lated by any precise rule, but by the use and wont of the manor or
barony. These services, therefore, being almost entirely arbitrary,

France. may serve as an example of those ancient tallages. It is a
tax upon the supposed profits of the farmer, which they estimate

subjected the tenant to many vexations. In Scotland the abolition
of all services not precisely stipulated in the lease, has, in the course

by the stock that he has upon the farm. It is his interest, therefore,
to appear to have as little as possible, and consequently to employ

of a few years, very much altered for the better the condition of
the yeomanry of that country.

as little as possible in its cultivation, and none in its improvement.
Should any stock happen to accumulate in the hands of a French

The public services to which the yeomanry were bound, were
not less arbitrary than the private ones. To make and maintain the

farmer, the taille is almost equal to a prohibition of its ever being
employed upon the land. This tax, besides, is supposed to

high roads, a servitude which still subsists, I believe, everywhere,
though with different degrees of oppression in different countries,

dishonour whoever is subject to it, and to degrade him below, not
only the rank of a gentleman, but that of a burgher; and whoever

was not the only one. When the king’s troops, when his household, or his officers of any kind, passed through any part of the

rents the lands of another becomes subject to it. No gentleman,
nor even any burgher, who has stock, will submit to this degrada-

country, the yeomanry were bound to provide them with horses,
carriages, and provisions, at a price regulated by the purveyor.

tion. This tax, therefore, not only hinders the stock which accumulates upon the land from being employed in its improvement,

Great Britain is, I believe, the only monarchy in Europe where the
oppression of purveyance has been entirely abolished. It still sub-

but drives away all other stock from it. The ancient tenths and
fifteenths, so usual in England in former times, seem, so far as

sists in France and Germany.
The public taxes, to which they were subject, were as irregular

they affected the land, to have been taxes of the same nature with
the taille.

and oppressive as the services The ancient lords, though extremely
unwilling to grant, themselves, any pecuniary aid to their sover-

Under all these discouragements, little improvement could be expected from the occupiers of land. That order of people, with all the

eign, easily allowed him to tallage, as they called it, their tenants,
and had not knowledge enough to foresee how much this must, in

liberty and security which law can give, must always improve under
great disadvantage. The farmer, compared with the proprietor, is as

the end, affect their own revenue. The taille, as it still subsists in

a merchant who trades with burrowed money, compared with one

319

The Wealth of Nations
who trades with his own. The stock of both may improve; but that
of the one, with only equal good conduct, must always improve

ers are in every country the principal improvers. There are more
such, perhaps, in England than in any other European monarchy.

more slowly than that of the other, on account of the large share of
the profits which is consumed by the interest of the loan. The lands

In the republican governments of Holland, and of Berne in Switzerland, the farmers are said to be not inferior to those of England.

cultivated by the farmer must, in the same manner, with only equal
good conduct, be improved more slowly than those cultivated by

The ancient policy of Europe was, over and above all this,
unfavourable to the improvement and cultivation of land, whether

the proprietor, on account of the large share of the produce which is
consumed in the rent, and which, had the farmer been proprietor,

carried on by the proprietor or by the farmer; first, by the general
prohibition of the exportation of corn, without a special licence,

he might have employed in the further improvement of the land.
The station of a farmer, besides, is, from the nature of things, infe-

which seems to have been a very universal regulation; and, secondly, by the restraints which were laid upon the inland com-

rior to that of a proprietor. Through the greater part of Europe, the
yeomanry are regarded as an inferior rank of people, even to the

merce, not only of corn, but of almost every other part of the
produce of the farm, by the absurd laws against engrossers, regraters,

better sort of tradesmen and mechanics, and in all parts of Europe
to the great merchants and master manufacturers. It can seldom

and forestallers, and by the privileges of fairs and markets. It has
already been observed in what manner the prohibition of the ex-

happen, therefore, that a man of any considerable stock should quit
the superior, in order to place himself in an inferior station. Even in

portation of corn, together with some encouragement given to
the importation of foreign corn, obstructed the cultivation of an-

the present state of Europe, therefore, little stock is likely to go from
any other profession to the improvement of land in the way of farm-

cient Italy, naturally the most fertile country in Europe, and at
that time the seat of the greatest empire in the world. To what

ing. More does, perhaps, in Great Britain than in any other country,
though even there the great stocks which are in some places em-

degree such restraints upon the inland commerce of this commodity, joined to the general prohibition of exportation, must

ployed in farming, have generally been acquired by fanning, the
trade, perhaps, in which, of all others, stock is commonly acquired

have discouraged the cultivation of countries less fertile, and less
favourably circumstanced, it is not, perhaps, very easy to imagine.

most slowly. After small proprietors, however, rich and great farm-

320

Adam Smith

CHAPTER III

they might give away their own daughters in marriage without the
consent of their lord, that upon their death their own children,

OF THE RISE AND PROGRESS OF CITIES
AND TOWNS, AFTER THE FALL OF THE
ROMAN EMPIRE

and not their lord, should succeed to their goods, and that they
might dispose of their own effects by will, must, before those grants,

THE INHABITANTS of cities and towns were, after the fall of the
Roman empire, not more favoured than those of the country. They

They seem, indeed, to have been a very poor, mean set of people,
who seemed to travel about with their goods from place to place,

consisted, indeed, of a very different order of people from the first
inhabitants of the ancient republics of Greece and Italy. These last

and from fair to fair, like the hawkers and pedlars of the present
times. In all the different countries of Europe then, in the same

were composed chiefly of the proprietors of lands, among whom
the public territory was originally divided, and who found it con-

manner as in several of the Tartar governments of Asia at present,
taxes used to be levied upon the persons and goods of travellers,

venient to build their houses in the neighbourhood of one another, and to surround them with a wall, for the sake of common

when they passed through certain manors, when they went over
certain bridges, when they carried about their goods from place to

defence. After the fall of the Roman empire, on the contrary, the
proprietors of land seem generally to have lived in fortified castles

place in a fair, when they erected in it a booth or stall to sell them
in. These different taxes were known in England by the names of

on their own estates, and in the midst of their own tenants and
dependants. The towns were chiefly inhabited by tradesmen and

passage, pontage, lastage, and stallage. Sometimes the king, sometimes a great lord, who had, it seems, upon some occasions, au-

mechanics, who seem, in those days, to have been of servile, or
very nearly of servile condition. The privileges which we find

thority to do this, would grant to particular traders, to such particularly as lived in their own demesnes, a general exemption from

granted by ancient charters to the inhabitants of some of the principal towns in Europe, sufficiently show what they were before

such taxes. Such traders, though in other respects of servile, or
very nearly of servile condition, were upon this account called free

those grants. The people to whom it is granted as a privilege, that

traders. They, in return, usually paid to their protector a sort of

have been either altogether, or very nearly, in the same state of
villanage with the occupiers of land in the country.

321

The Wealth of Nations
annual poll-tax. In those days protection was seldom granted without a valuable consideration, and this tax might perhaps be con-

whole rent. {See Madox, Firma Burgi, p. 18; also History of the
Exchequer, chap. 10, sect. v, p. 223, first edition.} To let a farm in

sidered as compensation for what their patrons might lose by their
exemption from other taxes. At first, both those poll-taxes and

this manner, was quite agreeable to the usual economy of, I believe, the sovereigns of all the different countries of Europe, who

those exemptions seem to have been altogether personal, and to
have affected only particular individuals, during either their lives,

used frequently to let whole manors to all the tenants of those
manors, they becoming jointly and severally answerable for the

or the pleasure of their protectors. In the very imperfect accounts
which have been published from Doomsday-book, of several of

whole rent; but in return being allowed to collect it in their own
way, and to pay it into the king’s exchequer by the hands of their

the towns of England, mention is frequently made, sometimes of
the tax which particular burghers paid, each of them, either to the

own bailiff, and being thus altogether freed from the insolence of
the king’s officers; a circumstance in those days regarded as of the

king, or to some other great lord, for this sort of protection, and
sometimes of the general amount only of all those taxes. {see Brady’s

greatest importance.
At first, the farm of the town was probably let to the burghers,

Historical Treatise of Cities and Boroughs, p. 3. etc.}
But how servile soever may have been originally the condition

in the same manner as it had been to other farmers, for a term of
years only. In process of time, however, it seems to have become

of the inhabitants of the towns, it appears evidently, that they
arrived at liberty and independency much earlier than the occupi-

the general practice to grant it to them in fee, that is for ever,
reserving a rent certain, never afterwards to be augmented. The

ers of land in the country. That part of the king’s revenue which
arose from such poll-taxes in any particular town, used commonly

payment having thus become perpetual, the exemptions, in return, for which it was made, naturally became perpetual too. Those

to be let in farm, during a term of years, for a rent certain, sometimes to the sheriff of the county, and sometimes to other persons.

exemptions, therefore, ceased to be personal, and could not afterwards be considered as belonging to individuals, as individuals,

The burghers themselves frequently got credit enough to be admitted to farm the revenues of this sort winch arose out of their

but as burghers of a particular burgh, which, upon this account,
was called a free burgh, for the same reason that they had been

own town, they becoming jointly and severally answerable for the

called free burghers or free traders.

322

Adam Smith
Along with this grant, the important privileges, above mentioned,
that they might give away their own daughters in marriage, that

trates. In other countries, much greater and more extensive jurisdictions were frequently granted to them. {See Madox, Firma Burgi.

their children should succeed to them, and that they might dispose of their own effects by will, were generally bestowed upon

See also Pfeffel in the Remarkable events under Frederick II. and his
Successors of the House of Suabia.}

the burghers of the town to whom it was given. Whether such
privileges had before been usually granted, along with the free-

It might, probably, be necessary to grant to such towns as were
admitted to farm their own revenues, some sort of compulsive

dom of trade, to particular burghers, as individuals, I know not. I
reckon it not improbable that they were, though I cannot produce

jurisdiction to oblige their own citizens to make payment. In those
disorderly times, it might have been extremely inconvenient to

any direct evidence of it. But however this may have been, the
principal attributes of villanage and slavery being thus taken away

have left them to seek this sort of justice from any other tribunal.
But it must seem extraordinary, that the sovereigns of all the dif-

from them, they now at least became really free, in our present
sense of the word freedom.

ferent countries of Europe should have exchanged in this manner
for a rent certain, never more to be augmented, that branch of

Nor was this all. They were generally at the same time erected
into a commonalty or corporation, with the privilege of having

their revenue, which was, perhaps, of all others, the most likely to
be improved by the natural course of things, without either ex-

magistrates and a town-council of their own, of making bye-laws
for their own government, of building walls for their own de-

pense or attention of their own; and that they should, besides,
have in this manner voluntarily erected a sort of independent re-

fence, and of reducing all their inhabitants under a sort of military
discipline, by obliging them to watch and ward; that is, as an-

publics in the heart of their own dominions.
In order to understand this, it must be remembered, that, in

ciently understood, to guard and defend those walls against all
attacks and surprises, by night as well as by day. In England they

those days, the sovereign of perhaps no country in Europe was
able to protect, through the whole extent of his dominions, the

were generally exempted from suit to the hundred and county
courts: and all such pleas as should arise among them, the pleas of

weaker part of his subjects from the oppression of the great lords.
Those whom the law could not protect, and who were not strong

the crown excepted, were left to the decision of their own magis-

enough to defend themselves, were obliged either to have recourse

323

The Wealth of Nations
to the protection of some great lord, and in order to obtain it, to
become either his slaves or vassals; or to enter into a league of

to bestow. Without the establishment of some regular government
of this kind, without some authority to compel their inhabitants

mutual defence for the common protection of one another. The
inhabitants of cities and burghs, considered as single individuals,

to act according to some certain plan or system, no voluntary
league of mutual defence could either have afforded them any

had no power to defend themselves; but by entering into a league
of mutual defence with their neighbours, they were capable of

permanent security, or have enabled them to give the king any
considerable support. By granting them the farm of their own

making no contemptible resistance. The lords despised the
burghers, whom they considered not only as a different order, but

town in fee, he took away from those whom he wished to have for
his friends, and, if one may say so, for his allies, all ground of

as a parcel of emancipated slaves, almost of a different species from
themselves. The wealth of the burghers never failed to provoke

jealousy and suspicion, that he was ever afterwards to oppress them,
either by raising the farm-rent of their town, or by granting it to

their envy and indignation, and they plundered them upon every
occasion without mercy or remorse. The burghers naturally hated

some other farmer.
The princes who lived upon the worst terms with their barons,

and feared the lords. The king hated and feared them too; but
though, perhaps, he might despise, he had no reason either to

seem accordingly to have been the most liberal in grants of this
kind to their burghs. King John of England, for example, appears

hate or fear the burghers. Mutual interest, therefore, disposed them
to support the king, and the king to support them against the

to have been a most munificent benefactor to his towns. {See
Madox.} Philip I. of France lost all authority over his barons. To-

lords. They were the enemies of his enemies, and it was his interest
to render them as secure and independent of those enemies as he

wards the end of his reign, his son Lewis, known afterwards by the
name of Lewis the Fat, consulted, according to Father Daniel,

could. By granting them magistrates of their own, the privilege of
making bye-laws for their own government, that of building walls

with the bishops of the royal demesnes, concerning the most proper
means of restraining the violence of the great lords. Their advice

for their own defence, and that of reducing all their inhabitants
under a sort of military discipline, he gave them all the means of

consisted of two different proposals. One was to erect a new order
of jurisdiction, by establishing magistrates and a town-council in

security and independency of the barons which it was in his power

every considerable town of his demesnes. The other was to form a

324

Adam Smith
new militia, by making the inhabitants of those towns, under the
command of their own magistrates, march out upon proper occa-

considerable Italian republics, of which so great a number arose
and perished between the end of the twelfth and the beginning of

sions to the assistance of the king. It is from this period, according
to the French antiquarians, that we are to date the institution of

the sixteenth century.
In countries such as France and England, where the authority of

the magistrates and councils of cities in France. It was during the
unprosperous reigns of the princes of the house of Suabia, that the

the sovereign, though frequently very low, never was destroyed
altogether, the cities had no opportunity of becoming entirely in-

greater part of the free towns of Germany received the first grants
of their privileges, and that the famous Hanseatic league first be-

dependent. They became, however, so considerable, that the sovereign could impose no tax upon them, besides the stated farm-

came formidable. {See Pfeffel.}
The militia of the cities seems, in those times, not to have been

rent of the town, without their own consent. They were, therefore, called upon to send deputies to the general assembly of the

inferior to that of the country; and as they could be more readily
assembled upon any sudden occasion, they frequently had the

states of the kingdom, where they might join with the clergy and
the barons in granting, upon urgent occasions, some extraordi-

advantage in their disputes with the neighbouring lords. In countries such as Italy or Switzerland, in which, on account either of

nary aid to the king. Being generally, too, more favourable to his
power, their deputies seem sometimes to have been employed by

their distance from the principal seat of government, of the natural strength of the country itself, or of some other reason, the

him as a counterbalance in those assemblies to the authority of
the great lords. Hence the origin of the representation of burghs

sovereign came to lose the whole of his authority; the cities generally became independent republics, and conquered all the nobility

in the states-general of all great monarchies in Europe.
Order and good government, and along with them the liberty

in their neighbourhood; obliging them to pull down their castles
in the country, and to live, like other peaceable inhabitants, in the

and security of individuals, were in this manner established in
cities, at a time when the occupiers of land in the country, were

city. This is the short history of the republic of Berne, as well as of
several other cities in Switzerland. If you except Venice, for of that

exposed to every sort of violence. But men in this defenceless state
naturally content themselves with their necessary subsistence; be-

city the history is somewhat different, it is the history of all the

cause, to acquire more, might only tempt the injustice of their

325

The Wealth of Nations
oppressors. On the contrary, when they are secure of enjoying the
fruits of their industry, they naturally exert it to better their condi-

They have a much wider range, and may draw them from the
most remote corners of the world, either in exchange for the manu-

tion, and to acquire not only the necessaries, but the conveniencies
and elegancies of life. That industry, therefore, which aims at some-

factured produce of their own industry, or by performing the office of carriers between distant countries, and exchanging the pro-

thing more than necessary subsistence, was established in cities
long before it was commonly practised by the occupiers of land in

duce of one for that of another. A city might, in this manner, grow
up to great wealth and splendour, while not only the country in

the country. If, in the hands of a poor cultivator, oppressed with
the servitude of villanage, some little stock should accumulate, he

its neighbourhood, but all those to which it traded, were in poverty and wretchedness. Each of those countries, perhaps, taken

would naturally conceal it with great care from his master, to whom
it would otherwise have belonged, and take the first opportunity

singly, could afford it but a small part, either of its subsistence or
of its employment; but all of them taken together, could afford it

of running away to a town. The law was at that time so indulgent
to the inhabitants of towns, and so desirous of diminishing the

both a great subsistence and a great employment. There were, however, within the narrow circle of the commerce of those times,

authority of the lords over those of the country, that if he could
conceal himself there from the pursuit of his lord for a year, he

some countries that were opulent and industrious. Such was the
Greek empire as long as it subsisted, and that of the Saracens dur-

was free for ever. Whatever stock, therefore, accumulated in the
hands of the industrious part of the inhabitants of the country,

ing the reigns of the Abassides. Such, too, was Egypt till it was
conquered by the Turks, some part of the coast of Barbary, and all

naturally took refuge in cities, as the only sanctuaries in which it
could be secure to the person that acquired it.

those provinces of Spain which were under the government of the
Moors.

The inhabitants of a city, it is true, must always ultimately derive their subsistence, and the whole materials and means of their

The cities of Italy seem to have been the first in Europe which
were raised by commerce to any considerable degree of opulence.

industry, from the country. But those of a city, situated near either
the sea-coast or the banks of a navigable river, are not necessarily

Italy lay in the centre of what was at that time the improved and
civilized part of the world. The crusades, too, though, by the great

confined to derive them from the country in their neighbourhood.

waste of stock and destruction of inhabitants which they occa-

326

Adam Smith
sioned, they must necessarily have retarded the progress of the
greater part of Europe, were extremely favourable to that of some

general as to occasion a considerable demand, the merchants, in
order to save the expense of carriage, naturally endeavoured to

Italian cities. The great armies which marched from all parts to
the conquest of the Holy Land, gave extraordinary encourage-

establish some manufactures of the same kind in their own country. Hence the origin of the first manufactures for distant sale,

ment to the shipping of Venice, Genoa, and Pisa, sometimes in
transporting them thither, and always in supplying them with pro-

that seem to have been established in the western provinces of
Europe, after the fall of the Roman empire.

visions. They were the commissaries, if one may say so, of those
armies; and the most destructive frenzy that ever befel the Euro-

No large country, it must be observed, ever did or could subsist
without some sort of manufactures being carried on in it; and

pean nations, was a source of opulence to those republics.
The inhabitants of trading cities, by importing the improved

when it is said of any such country that it has no manufactures, it
must always be understood of the finer and more improved, or of

manufactures and expensive luxuries of richer countries, afforded
some food to the vanity of the great proprietors, who eagerly pur-

such as are fit for distant sale. In every large country both the
clothing and household furniture or the far greater part of the

chased them with great quantities of the rude produce of their
own lands. The commerce of a great part of Europe in those times,

people, are the produce of their own industry. This is even more
universally the case in those poor countries which are commonly

accordingly, consisted chiefly in the exchange of their own rude,
for the manufactured produce of more civilized nations. Thus the

said to have no manufactures, than in those rich ones that are said
to abound in them. In the latter you will generally find, both in

wool of England used to be exchanged for the wines of France,
and the fine cloths of Flanders, in the same manner as the corn in

the clothes and household furniture of the lowest rank of people,
a much greater proportion of foreign productions than in the

Poland is at this day, exchanged for the wines and brandies of
France, and for the silks and velvets of France and Italy.

former.
Those manufactures which are fit for distant sale, seem to have

A taste for the finer and more improved manufactures was, in
this manner, introduced by foreign commerce into countries where

been introduced into different countries in two different ways.
Sometimes they have been introduced in the manner above men-

no such works were carried on. But when this taste became so

tioned, by the violent operation, if one may say so, of the stocks of

327

The Wealth of Nations
particular merchants and undertakers, who established them in
imitation of some foreign manufactures of the same kind. Such

Italy before the sixteenth century. Those arts were not introduced
into France till the reign of Charles IX. The manufactures of

manufactures, therefore, are the offspring of foreign commerce;
and such seem to have been the ancient manufactures of silks,

Flanders were carried on chiefly with Spanish and English wool.
Spanish wool was the material, not of the first woollen manufac-

velvets, and brocades, which flourished in Lucca during the thirteenth century. They were banished from thence by the tyranny of

ture of England, but of the first that was fit for distant sale. More
than one half the materials of the Lyons manufacture is at this day

one of Machiavel’s heroes, Castruccio Castracani. In 1310, nine
hundred families were driven out of Lucca, of whom thirty-one

foreign silk; when it was first established, the whole, or very nearly
the whole, was so. No part of the materials of the Spitalfields manu-

retired to Venice, and offered to introduce there the silk manufacture. {See Sandi Istoria civile de Vinezia, part 2 vol. i, page 247 and

facture is ever likely to be the produce of England. The seat of
such manufactures, as they are generally introduced by the scheme

256.} Their offer was accepted, many privileges were conferred
upon them, and they began the manufacture with three hundred

and project of a few individuals, is sometimes established in a
maritime city, and sometimes in an inland town, according as their

workmen. Such, too, seem to have been the manufactures of fine
cloths that anciently flourished in Flanders, and which were in-

interest, judgment, or caprice, happen to determine.
At other times, manufactures for distant sale grow up naturally,

troduced into England in the beginning of the reign of Elizabeth,
and such are the present silk manufactures of Lyons and Spitalfields.

and as it were of their own accord, by the gradual refinement of
those household and coarser manufactures which must at all times

Manufactures introduced in this manner are generally employed
upon foreign materials, being imitations of foreign manufactures.

be carried on even in the poorest and rudest countries. Such manufactures are generally employed upon the materials which the coun-

When the Venetian manufacture was first established, the materials were all brought from Sicily and the Levant. The more ancient

try produces, and they seem frequently to have been first refined
and improved In such inland countries as were not, indeed, at a

manufacture of Lucca was likewise carried on with foreign materials. The cultivation of mulberry trees, and the breeding of silk-

very great, but at a considerable distance from the sea-coast, and
sometimes even from all water carriage. An inland country, natu-

worms, seem not to have been common in the northern parts of

rally fertile and easily cultivated, produces a great surplus of pro-

328

Adam Smith
visions beyond what is necessary for maintaining the cultivators;
and on account of the expense of land carriage, and inconveniency

fines, more distant markets. For though neither the rude produce,
nor even the coarse manufacture, could, without the greatest dif-

of river navigation, it may frequently be difficult to send this surplus abroad. Abundance, therefore, renders provisions cheap, and

ficulty, support the expense of a considerable land-carriage, the
refined and improved manufacture easily may. In a small bulk it

encourages a great number of workmen to settle in the
neighbourhood, who find that their industry can there procure

frequently contains the price of a great quantity of rude produce.
A piece of fine cloth, for example which weighs only eighty pounds,

them more of the necessaries and conveniencies of life than in
other places. They work up the materials of manufacture which

contains in it the price, not only of eighty pounds weight of wool,
but sometimes of several thousand weight of corn, the mainte-

the land produces, and exchange their finished work, or, what is
the same thing, the price of it, for more materials and provisions.

nance of the different working people, and of their immediate
employers. The corn which could with difficulty have been car-

They give a new value to the surplus part of the rude produce, by
saving the expense of carrying it to the water-side, or to some

ried abroad in its own shape, is in this manner virtually exported
in that of the complete manufacture, and may easily be sent to the

distant market; and they furnish the cultivators with something in
exchange for it that is either useful or agreeable to them, upon

remotest corners of the world. In this manner have grown up naturally, and, as it were, of their own accord, the manufactures of

easier terms than they could have obtained it before. The cultivators get a better price for their surplus produce, and can purchase

Leeds, Halifax, Sheffield, Birmingham, and Wolverhampton. Such
manufactures are the offspring of agriculture. In the modern his-

cheaper other conveniencies which they have occasion for. They
are thus both encouraged and enabled to increase this surplus pro-

tory of Europe, their extension and improvement have generally
been posterior to those which were the offspring of foreign com-

duce by a further improvement and better cultivation of the land;
and as the fertility of she land had given birth to the manufacture,

merce. England was noted for the manufacture of fine cloths made
of Spanish wool, more than a century before any of those which

so the progress of the manufacture reacts upon the land, and increases still further it’s fertility. The manufacturers first supply the

now flourish in the places above mentioned were fit for foreign
sale. The extension and improvement of these last could not take

neighbourhood, and afterwards, as their work improves and re-

place but in consequence of the extension and improvement of

329

The Wealth of Nations

CHAPTER IV

agriculture, the last and greatest effect of foreign commerce, and
of the manufactures immediately introduced by it, and which I

HOW THE COMMERCE OF TOWNS
CONTRIBUTED TO THE IMPROVEMENT OF THE COUNTRY

shall now proceed to explain.

THE INCREASE AND RICHES of commercial and manufacturing towns
contributed to the improvement and cultivation of the countries
to which they belonged, in three different ways:
First, by affording a great and ready market for the rude produce of the country, they gave encouragement to its cultivation
and further improvement. This benefit was not even confined to
the countries in which they were situated, but extended more or
less to all those with which they had any dealings. To all of them
they afforded a market for some part either of their rude or manufactured produce, and, consequently, gave some encouragement
to the industry and improvement of all. Their own country, however, on account of its neighbourhood, necessarily derived the
greatest benefit from this market. Its rude produce being charged
with less carriage, the traders could pay the growers a better price
for it, and yet afford it as cheap to the consumers as that of more
distant countries.
Secondly, the wealth acquired by the inhabitants of cities was

330

Adam Smith
frequently employed in purchasing such lands as were to be sold,
of which a great part would frequently be uncultivated. Merchants

chant, render him much fitter to execute, with profit and success,
any project of improvement.

are commonly ambitious of becoming country gentlemen, and,
when they do, they are generally the best of all improvers. A mer-

Thirdly, and lastly, commerce and manufactures gradually introduced order and good government, and with them the liberty

chant is accustomed to employ his money chiefly in profitable
projects; whereas a mere country gentleman is accustomed to

and security of individuals, among the inhabitants of the country,
who had before lived almost in a continual state of war with their

employ it chiefly in expense. The one often sees his money go
from him, and return to him again with a profit; the other, when

neighbours, and of servile dependency upon their superiors. This,
though it has been the least observed, is by far the most important

once he parts with it, very seldom expects to see any more of it.
Those different habits naturally affect their temper and disposi-

of all their effects. Mr Hume is the only writer who, so far as I
know, has hitherto taken notice of it.

tion in every sort of business. The merchant is commonly a bold,
a country gentleman a timid undertaker. The one is not afraid to

In a country which has neither foreign commerce nor any of the
finer manufactures, a great proprietor, having nothing for which

lay out at once a large capital upon the improvement of his land,
when he has a probable prospect of raising the value of it in pro-

he can exchange the greater part of the produce of his lands which
is over and above the maintenance of the cultivators, consumes

portion to the expense; the other, if he has any capital, which is
not always the case, seldom ventures to employ it in this manner.

the whole in rustic hospitality at home. If this surplus produce is
sufficient to maintain a hundred or a thousand men, he can make

If he improves at all, it is commonly not with a capital, but with
what he can save out or his annual revenue. Whoever has had the

use of it in no other way than by maintaining a hundred or a
thousand men. He is at all times, therefore, surrounded with a

fortune to live in a mercantile town, situated in an unimproved
country, must have frequently observed how much more spirited

multitude of retainers and dependants, who, having no equivalent to give in return for their maintenance, but being fed entirely

the operations of merchants were in this way, than those of mere
country gentlemen. The habits, besides, of order, economy, and

by his bounty, must obey him, for the same reason that soldiers
must obey the prince who pays them. Before the extension of com-

attention, to which mercantile business naturally forms a mer-

merce and manufactures in Europe, the hospitality of the rich and

331

The Wealth of Nations
the great, from the sovereign down to the smallest baron, exceeded
every thing which, in the present times, we can easily form a no-

A crown, half a crown, a sheep, a lamb, was some years ago, in the
Highlands of Scotland, a common rent for lands which main-

tion of Westminster-hall was the dining-room of William Rufus,
and might frequently, perhaps, not be too large for his company.

tained a family. In some places it is so at this day; nor will money
at present purchase a greater quantity of commodities there than

It was reckoned a piece of magnificence in Thomas Becket, that
he strewed the floor of his hall with clean hay or rushes in the

in other places. In a country where the surplus produce of a large
estate must be consumed upon the estate itself, it will frequently

season, in order that the knights and squires, who could not get
seats, might not spoil their fine clothes when they sat down on the

be more convenient for the proprietor, that part of it be consumed
at a distance from his own house, provided they who consume it

floor to eat their dinner. The great Earl of Warwick is said to have
entertained every day, at his different manors, 30,000 people; and

are as dependent upon him as either his retainers or his menial
servants. He is thereby saved from the embarrassment of either

though the number here may have been exaggerated, it must, however, have been very great to admit of such exaggeration. A hospi-

too large a company, or too large a family. A tenant at will, who
possesses land sufficient to maintain his family for little more than

tality nearly of the same kind was exercised not many years ago in
many different parts of the Highlands of Scotland. It seems to be

a quit-rent, is as dependent upon the proprietor as any servant or
retainer whatever, and must obey him with as little reserve. Such a

common in all nations to whom commerce and manufactures are
little known. I have seen, says Doctor Pocock, an Arabian chief

proprietor, as he feeds his servants and retainers at his own house,
so he feeds his tenants at their houses. The subsistence of both is

dine in the streets of a town where he had come to sell his cattle,
and invite all passengers, even common beggars, to sit down with

derived from his bounty, and its continuance depends upon his
good pleasure.

him and partake of his banquet.
The occupiers of land were in every respect as dependent upon

Upon the authority which the great proprietors necessarily had,
in such a state of things, over their tenants and retainers, was

the great proprietor as his retainers. Even such of them as were not
in a state of villanage, were tenants at will, who paid a rent in no

founded the power of the ancient barons. They necessarily became the judges in peace, and the leaders in war, of all who dwelt

respect equivalent to the subsistence which the land afforded them.

upon their estates. They could maintain order, and execute the

332

Adam Smith
law, within their respective demesnes, because each of them could
there turn the whole force of all the inhabitants against the injus-

diction of the Saxon lords in England appear to have been as great
before the Conquest as that of any of the Norman lords after it.

tice of anyone. No other person had sufficient authority to do
this. The king, in particular, had not. In those ancient times, he

But the feudal law is not supposed to have become the common
law of England till after the Conquest. That the most extensive

was little more than the greatest proprietor in his dominions, to
whom, for the sake of common defence against their common

authority and jurisdictions were possessed by the great lords in
France allodially, long before the feudal law was introduced into

enemies, the other great proprietors paid certain respects. To have
enforced payment of a small debt within the lands of a great pro-

that country, is a matter of fact that admits of no doubt. That
authority, and those jurisdictions, all necessarily flowed from the

prietor, where all the inhabitants were armed, and accustomed to
stand by one another, would have cost the king, had he attempted

state of property and manners just now described. Without remounting to the remote antiquities of either the French or En-

it by his own authority, almost the same effort as to extinguish a
civil war. He was, therefore, obliged to abandon the administra-

glish monarchies, we may find, in much later times, many proofs
that such effects must always flow from such causes. It is not thirty

tion of justice, through the greater part of the country, to those
who were capable of administering it; and, for the same reason, to

years ago since Mr Cameron of Lochiel, a gentleman of Lochaber
in Scotland, without any legal warrant whatever, not being what

leave the command of the country militia to those whom that
militia would obey.

was then called a lord of regality, nor even a tenant in chief, but a
vassal of the Duke of Argyll, and with out being so much as a

It is a mistake to imagine that those territorial jurisdictions took
their origin from the feudal law. Not only the highest jurisdic-

justice of peace, used, notwithstanding, to exercise the highest
criminal jurisdictions over his own people. He is said to have done

tions, both civil and criminal, but the power of levying troops, of
coining money, and even that of making bye-laws for the govern-

so with great equity, though without any of the formalities of justice; and it is not improbable that the state of that part of the

ment of their own people, were all rights possessed allodially by
the great proprietors of land, several centuries before even the name

country at that time made it necessary for him to assume this
authority, in order to maintain the public peace. That gentleman,

of the feudal law was known in Europe. The authority and juris-

whose rent never exceeded £500 a-year, carried, in 1745, 800 of

333

The Wealth of Nations
his own people into the rebellion with him.
The introduction of the feudal law, so far from extending, may

still continued to make war according to their own discretion,
almost continually upon one another, and very frequently upon

be regarded as an attempt to moderate, the authority of the great
allodial lords. It established a regular subordination, accompanied

the king; and the open country still continued to be a scene of
violence, rapine, and disorder.

with a long train of services and duties, from the king down to the
smallest proprietor. During the minority of the proprietor, the

But what all the violence of the feudal institutions could never
have effected, the silent and insensible operation of foreign com-

rent, together with the management of his lands, fell into the hands
of his immediate superior; and, consequently, those of all great

merce and manufactures gradually brought about. These gradually furnished the great proprietors with something for which they

proprietors into the hands of the king, who was charged with the
maintenance and education of the pupil, and who, from his au-

could exchange the whole surplus produce of their lands, and which
they could consume themselves, without sharing it either with

thority as guardian, was supposed to have a right of disposing of
him in marriage, provided it was in a manner not unsuitable to

tenants or retainers. All for ourselves, and nothing for other people,
seems, in every age of the world, to have been the vile maxim of

his rank. But though this institution necessarily tended to
strengthen the authority of the king, and to weaken that of the

the masters of mankind. As soon, therefore, as they could find a
method of consuming the whole value of their rents themselves,

great proprietors, it could not do either sufficiently for establishing order and good government among the inhabitants of the coun-

they had no disposition to share them with any other persons. For
a pair of diamond buckles, perhaps, or for something as frivolous

try; because it could not alter sufficiently that state of property
and manners from which the disorders arose. The authority of

and useless, they exchanged the maintenance, or, what is the same
thing, the price of the maintenance of 1000 men for a year, and

government still continued to be, as before, too weak in the head,
and too strong in the inferior members; and the excessive strength

with it the whole weight and authority which it could give them.
The buckles, however, were to be all their own, and no other hu-

of the inferior members was the cause of the weakness of the head.
After the institution of feudal subordination, the king was as inca-

man creature was to have any share of them; whereas, in the more
ancient method of expense, they must have shared with at least

pable of restraining the violence of the great lords as before. They

1000 people. With the judges that were to determine the prefer-

334

Adam Smith
ence, this difference was perfectly decisive; and thus, for the gratification of the most childish, the meanest, and the most sordid of all

thousandth part of their whole annual maintenance. Though he
contributes, therefore, to the maintenance of them all, they are all

vanities they gradually bartered their whole power and authority.
In a country where there is no foreign commerce, nor any of the

more or less independent of him, because generally they can all be
maintained without him.

finer manufactures, a man of £10,000 a-year cannot well employ
his revenue in any other way than in maintaining, perhaps, 1000

When the great proprietors of land spend their rents in maintaining their tenants and retainers, each of them maintains en-

families, who are all of them necessarily at his command. In the
present state of Europe, a man of £10,000 a-year can spend his

tirely all his own tenants and all his own retainers. But when they
spend them in maintaining tradesmen and artificers, they may, all

whole revenue, and he generally does so, without directly maintaining twenty people, or being able to command more than ten

of them taken together, perhaps maintain as great, or, on account
of the waste which attends rustic hospitality, a greater number of

footmen, not worth the commanding. Indirectly, perhaps, he maintains as great, or even a greater number of people, than he could

people than before. Each of them, however, taken singly, contributes often but a very small share to the maintenance of any indi-

have done by the ancient method of expense. For though the quantity of precious productions for which he exchanges his whole

vidual of this greater number. Each tradesman or artificer derives
his subsistence from the employment, not of one, but of a hun-

revenue be very small, the number of workmen employed in collecting and preparing it must necessarily have been very great. Its

dred or a thousand different customers. Though in some measure
obliged to them all, therefore, he is not absolutely dependent upon

great price generally arises from the wages of their labour, and the
profits of all their immediate employers. By paying that price, he

any one of them.
The personal expense of the great proprietors having in this man-

indirectly pays all those wages and profits, and thus indirectly contributes to the maintenance of all the workmen and their employ-

ner gradually increased, it was impossible that the number of their
retainers should not as gradually diminish, till they were at last

ers. He generally contributes, however, but a very small proportion to that of each; to a very few, perhaps, not a tenth, to many

dismissed altogether. The same cause gradually led them to dismiss the unnecessary part of their tenants. Farms were enlarged,

not a hundredth, and to some not a thousandth, or even a ten

and the occupiers of land, notwithstanding the complaints of de-

335

The Wealth of Nations
population, reduced to the number necessary for cultivating it,
according to the imperfect state of cultivation and improvement

either expressly stipulated in the lease, or imposed upon him by
the common and known law of the country.

in those times. By the removal of the unnecessary mouths, and by
exacting from the farmer the full value of the farm, a greater sur-

The tenants having in this manner become independent, and
the retainers being dismissed, the great proprietors were no longer

plus, or, what is the same thing, the price of a greater surplus, was
obtained for the proprietor, which the merchants and manufac-

capable of interrupting the regular execution of justice, or of disturbing the peace of the country. Having sold their birth-right,

turers soon furnished him with a method of spending upon his
own person, in the same manner as he had done the rest. The

not like Esau, for a mess of pottage in time of hunger and necessity, but, in the wantonness of plenty, for trinkets and baubles,

cause continuing to operate, he was desirous to raise his rents above
what his lands, in the actual state of their improvement, could

fitter to be the playthings of children than the serious pursuits of
men, they became as insignificant as any substantial burgher or

afford. His tenants could agree to this upon one condition only,
that they should be secured in their possession for such a term of

tradesmen in a city. A regular government was established in the
country as well as in the city, nobody having sufficient power to

years as might give them time to recover, with profit, whatever
they should lay not in the further improvement of the land. The

disturb its operations in the one, any more than in the other.
It does not, perhaps, relate to the present subject, but I cannot

expensive vanity of the landlord made him willing to accept of
this condition; and hence the origin of long leases.

help remarking it, that very old families, such as have possessed
some considerable estate from father to son for many successive

Even a tenant at will, who pays the full value of the land, is not
altogether dependent upon the landlord. The pecuniary advan-

generations, are very rare in commercial countries. In countries
which have little commerce, on the contrary, such as Wales, or the

tages which they receive from one another are mutual and equal,
and such a tenant will expose neither his life nor his fortune in the

Highlands of Scotland, they are very common. The Arabian histories seem to be all full of genealogies; and there is a history writ-

service of the proprietor. But if he has a lease for along term of
years, he is altogether independent; and his landlord must not

ten by a Tartar Khan, which has been translated into several European languages, and which contains scarce any thing else; a proof

expect from him even the most trifling service, beyond what is

that ancient families are very common among those nations. In

336

Adam Smith
countries where a rich man can spend his revenue in no other way
than by maintaining as many people as it can maintain, he is apt to

It was thus, that, through the greater part of Europe, the commerce and manufactures of cities, instead of being the effect, have

run out, and his benevolence, it seems, is seldom so violent as to
attempt to maintain more than he can afford. But where he can

been the cause and occasion of the improvement and cultivation
of the country.

spend the greatest revenue upon his own person, he frequently has
no bounds to his expense, because he frequently has no bounds to

This order, however, being contrary to the natural course of
things, is necessarily both slow and uncertain. Compare the slow

his vanity, or to his affection for his own person. In commercial
countries, therefore, riches, in spite of the most violent regulations

progress of those European countries of which the wealth depends
very much upon their commerce and manufactures, with the rapid

of law to prevent their dissipation, very seldom remain long in the
same family. Among simple nations, on the contrary, they frequently

advances of our North American colonies, of which the wealth is
founded altogether in agriculture. Through the greater part of

do, without any regulations of law; for among nations of shepherds,
such as the Tartars and Arabs, the consumable nature of their prop-

Europe, the number of inhabitants is not supposed to double in
less than five hundred years. In several of our North American

erty necessarily renders all such regulations impossible.
A revolution of the greatest importance to the public happiness,

colonies, it is found to double in twenty or five-and-twenty years.
In Europe, the law of primogeniture, and perpetuities of different

was in this manner brought about by two different orders of people,
who had not the least intention to serve the public. To gratify the

kinds, prevent the division of great estates, and thereby hinder the
multiplication of small proprietors. A small proprietor, however,

most childish vanity was the sole motive of the great proprietors.
The merchants and artificers, much less ridiculous, acted merely

who knows every part of his little territory, views it with all the
affection which property, especially small property, naturally in-

from a view to their own interest, and in pursuit of their own
pedlar principle of turning a penny wherever a penny was to be

spires, and who upon that account takes pleasure, not only in
cultivating, but in adorning it, is generally of all improvers the

got. Neither of them had either knowledge or foresight of that
great revolution which the folly of the one, and the industry of the

most industrious, the most intelligent, and the most successful.
The same regulations, besides, keep so much land out of the mar-

other, was gradually bringing about.

ket, that there are always more capitals to buy than there is land to

337

The Wealth of Nations
sell, so that what is sold always sells at a monopoly price. The rent
never pays the interest of the purchase-money, and is, besides,

found a sufficient stock to begin a plantation with. The purchase
and improvement of uncultivated land is there the most profit-

burdened with repairs and other occasional charges, to which the
interest of money is not liable. To purchase land, is, everywhere in

able employment of the smallest as well as of the greatest capitals,
and the most direct road to all the fortune and illustration which

Europe, a most unprofitable employment of a small capital. For
the sake of the superior security, indeed, a man of moderate cir-

can be required in that country. Such land, indeed, is in North
America to be had almost for nothing, or at a price much below

cumstances, when he retires from business, will sometimes choose
to lay out his little capital in land. A man of profession, too whose

the value of the natural produce; a thing impossible in Europe, or
indeed in any country where all lands have long been private prop-

revenue is derived from another source often loves to secure his
savings in the same way. But a young man, who, instead of apply-

erty. If landed estates, however, were divided equally among all
the children, upon the death of any proprietor who left a numer-

ing to trade or to some profession, should employ a capital of two
or three thousand pounds in the purchase and cultivation of a

ous family, the estate would generally be sold. So much land would
come to market, that it could no longer sell at a monopoly price.

small piece of land, might indeed expect to live very happily and
very independently, but must bid adieu for ever to all hope of

The free rent of the land would go no nearer to pay the interest of
the purchase-money, and a small capital might be employed in

either great fortune or great illustration, which, by a different
employment of his stock, he might have had the same chance of

purchasing land as profitable as in any other way.
England, on account of the natural fertility of the soil, of the

acquiring with other people. Such a person, too, though he cannot aspire at being a proprietor, will often disdain to be a farmer.

great extent of the sea-coast in proportion to that of the whole
country, and of the many navigable rivers which run through it,

The small quantity of land, therefore, which is brought to market,
and the high price of what is brought thither, prevents a great

and afford the conveniency of water carriage to some of the most
inland parts of it, is perhaps as well fitted by nature as any large

number of capitals from being employed in its cultivation and
improvement, which would otherwise have taken that direction.

country in Europe to be the seat of foreign commerce, of manufactures for distant sale, and of all the improvements which these

In North America, on the contrary, fifty or sixty pounds is often

can occasion. From the beginning of the reign of Elizabeth, too,

338

Adam Smith
the English legislature has been peculiarly attentive to the interest
of commerce and manufactures, and in reality there is no country

shall endeavour to show hereafter, altogether illusory, sufficiently
demonstrate at least the good intention of the legislature to favour

in Europe, Holland itself not excepted, of which the law is, upon
the whole, more favourable to this sort of industry. Commerce

agriculture. But what is of much more importance than all of them,
the yeomanry of England are rendered as secure, as independent,

and manufactures have accordingly been continually advancing
during all this period. The cultivation and improvement of the

and as respectable, as law can make them. No country, therefore,
which the right of primogeniture takes place, which pays tithes,

country has, no doubt, been gradually advancing too; but it seems
to have followed slowly, and at a distance, the more rapid progress

and where perpetuities, though contrary to the spirit of the law,
are admitted in some cases, can give more encouragement to agri-

of commerce and manufactures. The greater part of the country
must probably have been cultivated before the reign of Elizabeth;

culture than England. Such, however, notwithstanding, is the state
of its cultivation. What would it have been, had the law given no

and a very great part of it still remains uncultivated, and the cultivation of the far greater part much inferior to what it might be,

direct encouragement to agriculture besides what arises indirectly
from the progress of commerce, and had left the yeomanry in the

The law of England, however, favours agriculture, not only indirectly, by the protection of commerce, but by several direct en-

same condition as in most other countries of Europe? It is now
more than two hundred years since the beginning of the reign of

couragements. Except in times of scarcity, the exportation of corn
is not only free, but encouraged by a bounty. In times of moderate

Elizabeth, a period as long as the course of human prosperity usually endures.

plenty, the importation of foreign corn is loaded with duties that
amount to a prohibition. The importation of live cattle, except

France seems to have had a considerable share of foreign commerce, near a century before England was distinguished as a com-

from Ireland, is prohibited at all times; and it is but of late that it
was permitted from thence. Those who cultivate the land, there-

mercial country. The marine of France was considerable, according
to the notions of the times, before the expedition of Charles VIII. to

fore, have a monopoly against their countrymen for the two greatest
and most important articles of land produce, bread and butcher’s

Naples. The cultivation and improvement of France, however, is,
upon the whole, inferior to that of England. The law of the country

meat. These encouragements, although at bottom, perhaps, as I

has never given the same direct encouragement to agriculture.

339

The Wealth of Nations
The foreign commerce of Spain and Portual to the other parts
of Europe, though chiefly carried on in foreign ships, is very con-

tain possession, till some part of it has been secured and realized
in the cultivation and improvement of its lands. A merchant, it

siderable. That to their colonies is carried on in their own, and is
much greater, on account of the great riches and extent of those

has been said very properly, is not necessarily the citizen of any
particular country. It is in a great measure indifferent to him from

colonies. But it has never introduced any considerable manufactures for distant sale into either of those countries, and the greater

what place he carries on his trade; and a very trifling disgust will
make him remove his capital, and, together with it, all the indus-

part of both still remains uncultivated. The foreign commerce of
Portugal is of older standing than that of any great country in

try which it supports, from one country to another. No part of it
can be said to belong to any particular country, till it has been

Europe, except Italy.
Italy is the only great country of Europe which seems to have

spread, as it were, over the face of that country, either in buildings,
or in the lasting improvement of lands. No vestige now remains of

been cultivated and improved in every part, by means of foreign
commerce and manufactures for distant sale. Before the invasion

the great wealth said to have been possessed by the greater part of
the Hanse Towns, except in the obscure histories of the thirteenth

of Charles VIII., Italy, according to Guicciardini, was cultivated
not less in the most mountainous and barren parts of the country,

and fourteenth centuries. It is even uncertain where some of them
were situated, or to what towns in Europe the Latin names given

than in the plainest and most fertile. The advantageous situation
of the country, and the great number of independent status which

to some of them belong. But though the misfortunes of Italy, in
the end of the fifteenth and beginning of the sixteenth centuries,

at that time subsisted in it, probably contributed not a little to this
general cultivation. It is not impossible, too, notwithstanding this

greatly diminished the commerce and manufactures of the cities
of Lombardy and Tuscany, those countries still continue to be

general expression of one of the most judicious and reserved of
modern historians, that Italy was not at that time better cultivated

among the most populous and best cultivated in Europe. The civil
wars of Flanders, and the Spanish government which succeeded

than England is at present.
The capital, however, that is acquired to any country by com-

them, chased away the great commerce of Antwerp, Ghent, and
Bruges. But Flanders still continues to be one of the richest, best

merce and manufactures, is always a very precarious and uncer-

cultivated, and most populous provinces of Europe. The ordinary

340

Adam Smith
revolutions of war and government easily dry up the sources of
that wealth which arises from commerce only. That which arises

BOOK IV

from the more solid improvements of agriculture is much more
durable, and cannot be destroyed but by those more violent con-

OF SYSTEMS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY

vulsions occasioned by the depredations of hostile and barbarous
nations continued for a century or two together; such as those

P

that happened for some time before and after the fall of the Roman empire in the western provinces of Europe.

OLITICAL ECONOMY, considered as a branch of the science

of a statesman or legislator, proposes two distinct objects;
first, to provide a plentiful revenue or subsistence for the

people, or, more properly, to enable them to provide such a revenue or subsistence for themselves; and, secondly, to supply the
state or commonwealth with a revenue sufficient for the public
services. It proposes to enrich both the people and the sovereign.
The different progress of opulence in different ages and nations,
has given occasion to two different systems of political economy,
with regard to enriching the people. The one may be called the
system of commerce, the other that of agriculture. I shall endeavour to explain both as fully and distinctly as I can, and shall begin
with the system of commerce. It is the modern system, and is best
understood in our own country and in our own times.

341

The Wealth of Nations

CHAPTER I

silver in any country is supposed to be the readiest way to enrich
it. For some time after the discovery of America, the first inquiry

OF THE PRINCIPLE OF THE COMMERCIAL OR MERCANTILE SYSTEM

of the Spaniards, when they arrived upon any unknown coast,
used to be, if there was any gold or silver to be found in the

THAT WEALTH consists in money, or in gold and silver, is a popular

neighbourhood? By the information which they received, they
judged whether it was worth while to make a settlement there, or

notion which naturally arises from the double function of money,
as the instrument of commerce, and as the measure of value. In

if the country was worth the conquering. Plano Carpino, a monk
sent ambassador from the king of France to one of the sons of the

consequence of its being the instrument of commerce, when we
have money we can more readily obtain whatever else we have

famous Gengis Khan, says, that the Tartars used frequently to ask
him, if there was plenty of sheep and oxen in the kingdom of

occasion for, than by means of any other commodity. The great
affair, we always find, is to get money. When that is obtained,

France? Their inquiry had the same object with that of the Spaniards. They wanted to know if the country was rich enough to be

there is no difficulty in making any subsequent purchase. In consequence of its being the measure of value, we estimate that of all

worth the conquering. Among the Tartars, as among all other nations of shepherds, who are generally ignorant of the use of money,

other commodities by the quantity of money which they will exchange for. We say of a rich man, that he is worth a great deal, and

cattle are the instruments of commerce and the measures of value.
Wealth, therefore, according to them, consisted in cattle, as, ac-

of a poor man, that he is worth very little money. A frugal man, or
a man eager to be rich, is said to love money; and a careless, a

cording to the Spaniards, it consisted in gold and silver. Of the
two, the Tartar notion, perhaps, was the nearest to the truth.

generous, or a profuse man, is said to be indifferent about it. To
grow rich is to get money; and wealth and money, in short, are, in

Mr Locke remarks a distinction between money and other moveable goods. All other moveable goods, he says, are of so consum-

common language, considered as in every respect synonymous.
A rich country, in the same manner as a rich man, is supposed

able a nature, that the wealth which consists in them cannot be
much depended on; and a nation which abounds in them one

to be a country abounding in money; and to heap up gold and

year may, without any exportation, but merely by their own waste

342

Adam Smith
and extravagance, be in great want of them the next. Money, on
the contrary, is a steady friend, which, though it may travel about

In consequence of those popular notions, all the different nations of Europe have studied, though to little purpose, every pos-

from hand to hand, yet if it can be kept from going out of the
country, is not very liable to be wasted and consumed. Gold and

sible means of accumulating gold and silver in their respective
countries. Spain and Portugal, the proprietors of the principal mines

silver, therefore, are, according to him, the must solid and substantial part of the moveable wealth of a nation; and to multiply

which supply Europe with those metals, have either prohibited
their exportation under the severest penalties, or subjected it to a

those metals ought, he thinks, upon that account, to be the great
object of its political economy.

considerable duty. The like prohibition seems anciently to have
made a part of the policy of most other European nations. It is

Others admit, that if a nation could be separated from all the
world, it would be of no consequence how much or how little

even to be found, where we should least of all expect to find it, in
some old Scotch acts of Parliament, which forbid, under heavy

money circulated in it. The consumable goods, which were circulated by means of this money, would only be exchanged for a

penalties, the carrying gold or silver forth of the kingdom. The
like policy anciently took place both in France and England.

greater or a smaller number of pieces; but the real wealth or poverty of the country, they allow, would depend altogether upon the

When those countries became commercial, the merchants found
this prohibition, upon many occasions, extremely inconvenient.

abundance or scarcity of those consumable goods. But it is otherwise, they think, with countries which have connections with for-

They could frequently buy more advantageously with gold and
silver, than with any other commodity, the foreign goods which

eign nations, and which are obliged to carry on foreign wars, and
to maintain fleets and armies in distant countries. This, they say,

they wanted, either to import into their own, or to carry to some
other foreign country. They remonstrated, therefore, against this

cannot be done, but by sending abroad money to pay them with;
and a nation cannot send much money abroad, unless it has a

prohibition as hurtful to trade.
They represented, first, that the exportation of gold and silver,

good deal at home. Every such nation, therefore, must endeavour,
in time of peace, to accumulate gold and silver, that when occa-

in order to purchase foreign goods, did not always diminish the
quantity of those metals in the kingdom; that, on the contrary, it

sion requires, it may have wherewithal to carry on foreign wars.

might frequently increase the quantity; because, if the consump-

343

The Wealth of Nations
tion of foreign goods was not thereby increased in the country,
those goods might be re-exported to foreign countries, and being

in this case, to prohibit the exportation of those metals, could not
prevent it, but only, by making it more dangerous, render it more

there sold for a large profit, might bring back much more treasure
than was originally sent out to purchase them. Mr Mun compares

expensive: that the exchange was thereby turned more against the
country which owed the balance, than it otherwise might have

this operation of foreign trade to the seed-time and harvest of
agriculture. “If we only behold,” says he, “the actions of the hus-

been; the merchant who purchased a bill upon the foreign country being obliged to pay the banker who sold it, not only for the

bandman in the seed time, when he casteth away much good corn
into the ground, we shall account him rather a madman than a

natural risk, trouble, and expense of sending the money thither,
but for the extraordinary risk arising from the prohibition; but

husbandman. But when we consider his labours in the harvest,
which is the end of his endeavours, we shall find the worth and

that the more the exchange was against any country, the more the
balance of trade became necessarily against it; the money of that

plentiful increase of his actions.”
They represented, secondly, that this prohibition could not

country becoming necessarily of so much less value, in comparison with that of the country to which the balance was due. That if

hinder the exportation of gold and silver, which, on account of
the smallness of their bulk in proportion to their value, could

the exchange between England and Holland, for example, was
five per cent. against England, it would require 105 ounces of

easily be smuggled abroad. That this exportation could only be
prevented by a proper attention to what they called the balance of

silver in England to purchase a bill for 100 ounces of silver in
Holland: that 105 ounces of silver in England, therefore, would

trade. That when the country exported to a greater value than it
imported, a balance became due to it from foreign nations, which

be worth only 100 ounces of silver in Holland, and would purchase only a proportionable quantity of Dutch goods; but that

was necessarily paid to it in gold and silver, and thereby increased
the quantity of those metals in the kingdom. But that when it

100 ounces of silver in Holland, on the contrary, would be worth
105 ounces in England, and would purchase a proportionable

imported to a greater value than it exported, a contrary balance
became due to foreign nations, which was necessarily paid to them

quantity of English goods; that the English goods which were sold
to Holland would be sold so much cheaper, and the Dutch goods

in the same manner, and thereby diminished that quantity: that

which were sold to England so much dearer, by the difference of

344

Adam Smith
the exchange: that the one would draw so much less Dutch money
to England, and the other so much more English money to Hol-

those countries. But though the risk arising from the prohibition
might occasion some extraordinary expense to the bankers, it would

land, as this difference amounted to: and that the balance of trade,
therefore, would necessarily be so much more against England,

not necessarily carry any more money out of the country. This
expense would generally be all laid out in the country, in smug-

and would require a greater balance of gold and silver to be exported to Holland.

gling the money out of it, and could seldom occasion the exportation of a single sixpence beyond the precise sum drawn for. The

Those arguments were partly solid and partly sophistical. They
were solid, so far as they asserted that the exportation of gold and

high price of exchange, too, would naturally dispose the merchants
to endeavour to make their exports nearly balance their imports,

silver in trade might frequently be advantageous to the country.
They were solid, too, in asserting that no prohibition could pre-

in order that they might have this high exchange to pay upon as
small a sum as possible. The high price of exchange, besides, must

vent their exportation, when private people found any advantage
in exporting them. But they were sophistical, in supposing, that

necessarily have operated as a tax, in raising the price of foreign
goods, and thereby diminishing their consumption. It would tend,

either to preserve or to augment the quantity of those metals required more the attention of government, than to preserve or to

therefore, not to increase, but to diminish, what they called the
unfavourable balance of trade, and consequently the exportation

augment the quantity of any other useful commodities, which the
freedom of trade, without any such attention, never fails to supply

of gold and silver.
Such as they were, however, those arguments convinced the

in the proper quantity. They were sophistical, too, perhaps, in
asserting that the high price of exchange necessarily increased what

people to whom they were addressed. They were addressed by
merchants to parliaments and to the councils of princes, to nobles,

they called the unfavourable balance of trade, or occasioned the
exportation of a greater quantity of gold and silver. That high

and to country gentlemen; by those who were supposed to understand trade, to those who were conscious to them selves that they

price, indeed, was extremely disadvantageous to the merchants
who had any money to pay in foreign countries. They paid so

knew nothing about the matter. That foreign trade enriched the
country, experience demonstrated to the nobles and country gentle-

much dearer for the bills which their bankers granted them upon

men, as well as to the merchants; but how, or in what manner,

345

The Wealth of Nations
none of them well knew. The merchants knew perfectly in what
manner it enriched themselves, it was their business to know it.

just equally fruitless. The title of Mun’s book, England’s Treasure
in Foreign Trade, became a fundamental maxim in the political

But to know in what manner it enriched the country, was no part
of their business. The subject never came into their consideration,

economy, not of England only, but of all other commercial countries. The inland or home trade, the most important of all, the

but when they had occasion to apply to their country for some
change in the laws relating to foreign trade. It then became neces-

trade in which an equal capital affords the greatest revenue, and
creates the greatest employment to the people of the country, was

sary to say something about the beneficial effects of foreign trade,
and the manner in which those effects were obstructed by the laws

considered as subsidiary only to foreign trade. It neither brought
money into the country, it was said, nor carried any out of it. The

as they then stood. To the judges who were to decide the business,
it appeared a most satisfactory account of the matter, when they

country, therefore, could never become either richer or poorer by
means of it, except so far as its prosperity or decay might indi-

were told that foreign trade brought money into the country, but
that the laws in question hindered it from bringing so much as it

rectly influence the state of foreign trade.
A country that has no mines of its own, must undoubtedly draw

otherwise would do. Those arguments, therefore, produced the
wished-for effect. The prohibition of exporting gold and silver

its gold and silver from foreign countries, in the same manner as
one that has no vineyards of its own must draw its wines. It does

was, in France and England, confined to the coin of those respective countries. The exportation of foreign coin and of bullion was

not seem necessary, however, that the attention of government
should be more turned towards the one than towards the other

made free. In Holland, and in some other places, this liberty was
extended even to the coin of the country. The attention of govern-

object. A country that has wherewithal to buy wine, will always
get the wine which it has occasion for; and a country that has

ment was turned away from guarding against the exportation of
gold and silver, to watch over the balance of trade, as the only

wherewithal to buy gold and silver, will never be in want of those
metals. They are to be bought for a certain price, like all other

cause which could occasion any augmentation or diminution of
those metals. From one fruitless care, it was turned away to an-

commodities; and as they are the price of all other commodities,
so all other commodities are the price of those metals. We trust,

other care much more intricate, much more embarrassing, and

with perfect security, that the freedom of trade, without any at-

346

Adam Smith
tention of government, will always supply us with the wine which
we have occasion for; and we may trust, with equal security, that it

thousand ships of a thousand tons each. The navy of England
would not be sufficient.

will always supply us with all the gold and silver which we can
afford to purchase or to employ, either in circulating our com-

When the quantity of gold and silver imported into any country exceeds the effectual demand, no vigilance of government can

modities or in other uses.
The quantity of every commodity which human industry can

prevent their exportation. All the sanguinary laws of Spain and
Portugal are not able to keep their gold and silver at home. The

either purchase or produce, naturally regulates itself in every country according to the effectual demand, or according to the de-

continual importations from Peru and Brazil exceed the effectual
demand of those countries, and sink the price of those metals

mand of those who are willing to pay the whole rent, labour, and
profits, which must be paid in order to prepare and bring it to

there below that in the neighbouring countries. If, on the contrary, in any particular country, their quantity fell short of the

market. But no commodities regulate themselves more easily or
more exactly, according to this effectual demand, than gold and

effectual demand, so as to raise their price above that of the
neighbouring countries, the government would have no occasion

silver; because, on account of the small bulk and great value of
those metals, no commodities can be more easily transported from

to take any pains to import them. If it were even to take pains to
prevent their importation, it would not be able to effectuate it.

one place to another; from the places where they are cheap, to
those where they are dear; from the places where they exceed, to

Those metals, when the Spartans had got wherewithal to purchase them, broke through all the barriers which the laws of

those where they fall short of this effectual demand. If there were
in England, for example, an effectual demand for an additional

Lycurgus opposed to their entrance into Lacedaemon. All the sanguinary laws of the customs are not able to prevent the importa-

quantity of gold, a packet-boat could bring from Lisbon, or from
wherever else it was to be had, fifty tons of gold, which could be

tion of the teas of the Dutch and Gottenburg East India companies; because somewhat cheaper than those of the British com-

coined into more than five millions of guineas. But if there were
an effectual demand for grain to the same value, to import it would

pany. A pound of tea, however, is about a hundred times the bulk
of one of the highest prices, sixteen shillings, that is commonly

require, at five guineas a-ton, a million of tons of shipping, or a

paid for it in silver, and more than two thousand times the bulk of

347

The Wealth of Nations
the same price in gold, and, consequently, just so many times more
difficult to smuggle.

wanted, industry must stop. If provisions are wanted, the people
must starve. But if money is wanted, barter will supply its place,

It is partly owing to the easy transportation of gold and silver,
from the places where they abound to those where they are wanted,

though with a good deal of inconveniency. Buying and selling
upon credit, and the different dealers compensating their credits

that the price of those metals does not fluctuate continually, like
that of the greater part of other commodities, which are hindered

with one another, once a-month, or once a-year, will supply it
with less inconveniency. A well-regulated paper-money will sup-

by their bulk from shifting their situation, when the market happens to be either over or under-stocked with them. The price of

ply it not only without any inconveniency, but, in some cases,
with some advantages. Upon every account, therefore, the atten-

those metals, indeed, is not altogether exempted from variation;
but the changes to which it is liable are generally slow, gradual,

tion of government never was so unnecessarily employed, as when
directed to watch over the preservation or increase of the quantity

and uniform. In Europe, for example, it is supposed, without much
foundation, perhaps, that during the course of the present and

of money in any country.
No complaint, however, is more common than that of a scarcity

preceding century, they have been constantly, but gradually, sinking in their value, on account of the continual importations from

of money. Money, like wine, must always be scarce with those
who have neither wherewithal to buy it, nor credit to borrow it.

the Spanish West Indies. But to make any sudden change in the
price of gold and silver, so as to raise or lower at once, sensibly and

Those who have either, will seldom be in want either of the money,
or of the wine which they have occasion for. This complaint, how-

remarkably, the money price of all other commodities, requires
such a revolution in commerce as that occasioned by the discov-

ever, of the scarcity of money, is not always confined to improvident spendthrifts. It is sometimes general through a whole mer-

ery of America.
If, not withstanding all this, gold and silver should at any time

cantile town and the country in its neighbourhood. Over-trading
is the common cause of it. Sober men, whose projects have been

fall short in a country which has wherewithal to purchase them,
there are more expedients for supplying their place, than that of

disproportioned to their capitals, are as likely to have neither wherewithal to buy money, nor credit to borrow it, as prodigals, whose

almost any other commodity. If the materials of manufacture are

expense has been disproportioned to their revenue. Before their

348

Adam Smith
projects can be brought to bear, their stock is gone, and their credit
with it. They run about everywhere to borrow money, and every-

always the most unprofitable part of it.
It is not because wealth consists more essentially in money than

body tells them that they have none to lend. Even such general
complaints of the scarcity of money do not always prove that the

in goods, that the merchant finds it generally more easy to buy
goods with money, than to buy money with goods; but because

usual number of gold and silver pieces are not circulating in the
country, but that many people want those pieces who have noth-

money is the known and established instrument of commerce, for
which every thing is readily given in exchange, but which is not

ing to give for them. When the profits of trade happen to be greater
than ordinary over-trading becomes a general error, both among

always with equal readiness to be got in exchange for every thing.
The greater part of goods, besides, are more perishable than money,

great and small dealers. They do not always send more money
abroad than usual, but they buy upon credit, both at home and

and he may frequently sustain a much greater loss by keeping them.
When his goods are upon hand, too, he is more liable to such

abroad, an unusual quantity of goods, which they send to some
distant market, in hopes that the returns will come in before the

demands for money as he may not be able to answer, than when
he has got their price in his coffers. Over and above all this, his

demand for payment. The demand comes before the returns, and
they have nothing at hand with which they can either purchase

profit arises more directly from selling than from buying; and he
is, upon all these accounts, generally much more anxious to ex-

money or give solid security for borrowing. It is not any scarcity
of gold and silver, but the difficulty which such people find in

change his goods for money than his money for goods. But though
a particular merchant, with abundance of goods in his warehouse,

borrowing, and which their creditor find in getting payment, that
occasions the general complaint of the scarcity of money.

may sometimes be ruined by not being able to sell them in time, a
nation or country is not liable to the same accident, The whole

It would be too ridiculous to go about seriously to prove, that
wealth does not consist in money, or in gold and silver; but in

capital of a merchant frequently consists in perishable goods destined for purchasing money. But it is but a very small part of the

what money purchases, and is valuable only for purchasing. Money,
no doubt, makes always a part of the national capital; but it has

annual produce of the land and labour of a country, which can
ever be destined for purchasing gold and silver from their

already been shown that it generally makes but a small part, and

neighbours. The far greater part is circulated and consumed among

349

The Wealth of Nations
themselves; and even of the surplus which is sent abroad, the greater
part is generally destined for the purchase of other foreign goods.

gold and silver are of a more durable nature, and were it not for
this continual exportation, might be accumulated for ages together,

Though gold and silver, therefore, could not be had in exchange
for the goods destined to purchase them, the nation would not be

to the incredible augmentation of the real wealth of the country.
Nothing, therefore, it is pretended, can be more disadvantageous

ruined. It might, indeed, suffer some loss and inconveniency, and
be forced upon some of those expedients which are necessary for

to any country, than the trade which consists in the exchange of
such lasting for such perishable commodities. We do not, how-

supplying the place of money. The annual produce of its land and
labour, however, would be the same, or very nearly the same as

ever, reckon that trade disadvantageous, which consists in the exchange of the hardware of England for the wines of France, and

usual; because the same, or very nearly the same consumable capital would be employed in maintaining it. And though goods do

yet hardware is a very durable commodity, and were it not for this
continual exportation, might too be accumulated for ages together,

not always draw money so readily as money draws goods, in the
long-run they draw it more necessarily than even it draws them.

to the incredible augmentation of the pots and pans of the country. But it readily occurs, that the number of such utensils is in

Goods can serve many other purposes besides purchasing money,
but money can serve no other purpose besides purchasing goods.

every country necessarily limited by the use which there is for
them; that it would be absurd to have more pots and pans than

Money, therefore, necessarily runs after goods, but goods do not
always or necessarily run after money. The man who buys, does

were necessary for cooking the victuals usually consumed there;
and that, if the quantity of victuals were to increase, the number

not always mean to sell again, but frequently to use or to consume; whereas he who sells always means to buy again. The one

of pots and pans would readily increase along with it; a part of the
increased quantity of victuals being employed in purchasing them,

may frequently have done the whole, but the other can never have
done more than the one half of his business. It is not for its own

or in maintaining an additional number of workmen whose business it was to make them. It should as readily occur, that the quan-

sake that men desire money, but for the sake of what they can
purchase with it.

tity of gold and silver is, in every country, limited by the use which
there is for those metals; that their use consists in circulating com-

Consumable commodities, it is said, are soon destroyed; whereas

modities, as coin, and in affording a species of household furni-

350

Adam Smith
ture, as plate; that the quantity of coin in every country is regulated by the value of the commodities which are to be circulated

able commodities which are to be circulated, managed, and prepared by means of them, and you will infallibly increase the quan-

by it; increase that value, and immediately a part of it will be sent
abroad to purchase, wherever it is to be had, the additional quan-

tity; but if you attempt by extraordinary means to increase the
quantity, you will as infallibly diminish the use, and even the quan-

tity of coin requisite for circulating them: that the quantity of
plate is regulated by the number and wealth of those private fami-

tity too, which in those metals can never be greater than what the
use requires. Were they ever to be accumulated beyond this quan-

lies who choose to indulge themselves in that sort of magnificence; increase the number and wealth of such families, and a part

tity, their transportation is so easy, and the loss which attends their
lying idle and unemployed so great, that no law could prevent

of this increased wealth will most probably be employed in purchasing, wherever it is to be found, an additional quantity of plate;

their being immediately sent out of the country.
It is not always necessary to accumulate gold and silver, in order

that to attempt to increase the wealth of any country, either by
introducing or by detaining in it an unnecessary quantity of gold

to enable a country to carry on foreign wars, and to maintain
fleets and armies in distant countries. Fleets and armies are main-

and silver, is as absurd as it would be to attempt to increase the
good cheer of private families, by obliging them to keep an un-

tained, not with gold and silver, but with consumable goods. The
nation which, from the annual produce of its domestic industry,

necessary number of kitchen utensils. As the expense of purchasing those unnecessary utensils would diminish, instead of increas-

from the annual revenue arising out of its lands, and labour, and
consumable stock, has wherewithal to purchase those consumable

ing, either the quantity or goodness of the family provisions; so
the expense of purchasing an unnecessary quantity of gold and

goods in distant countries, can maintain foreign wars there.
A nation may purchase the pay and provisions of an army in a

silver must, in every country, as necessarily diminish the wealth
which feeds, clothes, and lodges, which maintains and employs

distant country three different ways; by sending abroad either,
first, some part of its accumulated gold and silver; or, secondly,

the people. Gold and silver, whether in the shape of coin or of
plate, are utensils, it must be remembered, as much as the furni-

some part of the annual produce of its manufactures; or, last of all,
some part of its annual rude produce.

ture of the kitchen. Increase the use of them, increase the consum-

The gold and silver which can properly be considered as accu-

351

The Wealth of Nations
mulated, or stored up in any country, may be distinguished into
three parts; first, the circulating money; secondly, the plate of pri-

The melting down of the plate of private families has, upon
every occasion, been found a still more insignificant one. The

vate families; and, last of all, the money which may have been
collected by many years parsimony, and laid up in the treasury of

French, in the beginning of the last war, did not derive so much
advantage from this expedient as to compensate the loss of the

the prince.
It can seldom happen that much can be spared from the circu-

fashion.
The accumulated treasures of the prince have in former times

lating money of the country; because in that there can seldom be
much redundancy. The value of goods annually bought and sold

afforded a much greater and more lasting resource. In the present
times, if you except the king of Prussia, to accumulate treasure

in any country requires a certain quantity of money to circulate
and distribute them to their proper consumers, and can give em-

seems to be no part of the policy of European princes.
The funds which maintained the foreign wars of the present

ployment to no more. The channel of circulation necessarily draws
to itself a sum sufficient to fill it, and never admits any more.

century, the most expensive perhaps which history records, seem
to have had little dependency upon the exportation either of the

Something, however, is generally withdrawn from this channel in
the case of foreign war. By the great number of people who are

circulating money, or of the plate of private families, or of the
treasure of the prince. The last French war cost Great Britain up-

maintained abroad, fewer are maintained at home. Fewer goods
are circulated there, and less money becomes necessary to circu-

wards of £90,000,000, including not only the £75,000,000 of
new debt that was contracted, but the additional 2s. in the pound

late them. An extraordinary quantity of paper money of some sort
or other, too, such as exchequer notes, navy bills, and bank bills,

land-tax, and what was annually borrowed of the sinking fund.
More than two-thirds of this expense were laid out in distant coun-

in England, is generally issued upon such occasions, and, by supplying the place of circulating gold and silver, gives an opportu-

tries; in Germany, Portugal, America, in the ports of the Mediterranean, in the East and West Indies. The kings of England had no

nity of sending a greater quantity of it abroad. All this, however,
could afford but a poor resource for maintaining a foreign war, of

accumulated treasure. We never heard of any extraordinary quantity of plate being melted down. The circulating gold and silver of

great expense, and several years duration.

the country had not been supposed to exceed £18,000,000. Since

352

Adam Smith
the late recoinage of the gold, however, it is believed to have been
a good deal under-rated. Let us suppose, therefore, according to

the creditors found it difficult to get payment. Gold and silver,
however, were generally to be had for their value, by those who

the most exaggerated computation which I remember to have either seen or heard of, that, gold and silver together, it amounted

had that value to give for them.
The enormous expense of the late war, therefore, must have

to £30,000,000. Had the war been carried on by means of our
money, the whole of it must, even according to this computation,

been chiefly defrayed, not by the exportation of gold and silver,
but by that of British commodities of some kind or other. When

have been sent out and returned again, at least twice in a period of
between six and seven years. Should this be supposed, it would

the government, or those who acted under them, contracted with
a merchant for a remittance to some foreign country, he would

afford the most decisive argument, to demonstrate how unnecessary it is for government to watch over the preservation of money,

naturally endeavour to pay his foreign correspondent, upon whom
he granted a bill, by sending abroad rather commodities than gold

since, upon this supposition, the whole money of the country
must have gone from it, and returned to it again, two different

and silver. If the commodities of Great Britain were not in demand in that country, he would endeavour to send them to some

times in so short a period, without any body’s knowing any thing
of the matter. The channel of circulation, however, never appeared

other country in which he could purchase a bill upon that country. The transportation of commodities, when properly suited to

more empty than usual during any part of this period. Few people
wanted money who had wherewithal to pay for it. The profits of

the market, is always attended with a considerable profit; whereas
that of gold and silver is scarce ever attended with any. When

foreign trade, indeed, were greater than usual during the whole
war, but especially towards the end of it. This occasioned, what it

those metals are sent abroad in order to purchase foreign commodities, the merchant’s profit arises, not from the purchase, but

always occasions, a general over-trading in all the ports of Great
Britain; and this again occasioned the usual complaint of the scar-

from the sale of the returns. But when they are sent abroad merely
to pay a debt, he gets no returns, and consequently no profit. He

city of money, which always follows over-trading. Many people
wanted it, who had neither wherewithal to buy it, nor credit to

naturally, therefore, exerts his invention to find out a way of paying his foreign debts, rather by the exportation of commodities,

borrow it; and because the debtors found it difficult to borrow,

than by that of gold and silver. The great quantity of British goods,

353

The Wealth of Nations
exported during the course of the late war, without bringing back
any returns, is accordingly remarked by the author of the Present

republic Great Britain may have annually employed in this manner, it must have been annually purchased, either with British com-

State of the Nation.
Besides the three sorts of gold and silver above mentioned, there

modities, or with something else that had been purchased with
them; which still brings us back to commodities, to the annual

is in all great commercial countries a good deal of bullion alternately imported and exported, for the purposes of foreign trade.

produce of the land and labour of the country, as the ultimate
resources which enabled us to carry on the war. It is natural, in-

This bullion, as it circulates among different commercial countries, in the same manner as the national coin circulates in every

deed, to suppose, that so great an annual expense must have been
defrayed from a great annual produce. The expense of 1761, for

country, may be considered as the money of the great mercantile
republic. The national coin receives its movement and direction

example, amounted to more than £19,000,000. No accumulation could have supported so great an annual profusion. There is

from the commodities circulated within the precincts of each particular country; the money in the mercantile republic, from those

no annual produce, even of gold and silver, which could have supported it. The whole gold and silver annually imported into both

circulated between different countries. Both are employed in facilitating exchanges, the one between different individuals of the

Spain and Portugal, according to the best accounts, does not commonly much exceed £6,000,000 sterling, which, in some years,

same, the other between those of different nations. Part of this
money of the great mercantile republic may have been, and prob-

would scarce have paid four months expense of the late war.
The commodities most proper for being transported to distant

ably was, employed in carrying on the late war. In time of a general war, it is natural to suppose that a movement and direction

countries, in order to purchase there either the pay and provisions
of an army, or some part of the money of the mercantile republic

should be impressed upon it, different from what it usually follows in profound peace, that it should circulate more about the

to be employed in purchasing them, seem to be the finer and more
improved manufactures; such as contain a great value in a small

seat of the war, and be more employed in purchasing there, and in
the neighbouring countries, the pay and provisions of the differ-

bulk, and can therefore be exported to a great distance at little
expense. A country whose industry produces a great annual sur-

ent armies. But whatever part of this money of the mercantile

plus of such manufactures, which are usually exported to foreign

354

Adam Smith
countries, may carry on for many years a very expensive foreign
war, without either exporting any considerable quantity of gold

be carried on by the exportation of the rude produce of the soil.
The expense of sending such a quantity of it into a foreign coun-

and silver, or even having any such quantity to export. A considerable part of the annual surplus of its manufactures must, indeed,

try as might purchase the pay and provisions of an army would be
too great. Few countries, too, produce much more rude produce

in this case, be exported without bringing back any returns to the
country, though it does to the merchant; the government pur-

than what is sufficient for the subsistence of their own inhabitants. To send abroad any great quantity of it, therefore, would be

chasing of the merchant his bills upon foreign countries, in order
to purchase there the pay and provisions of an army. Some part of

to send abroad a part of the necessary subsistence of the people. It
is otherwise with the exportation of manufactures. The mainte-

this surplus, however, may still continue to bring back a return.
The manufacturers during; the war will have a double demand

nance of the people employed in them is kept at home, and only
the surplus part of their work is exported. Mr Hume frequently

upon them, and be called upon first to work up goods to be sent
abroad, for paying the bills drawn upon foreign countries for the

takes notice of the inability of the ancient kings of England to
carry on, without interruption, any foreign war of long duration.

pay and provisions of the army: and, secondly, to work up such as
are necessary for purchasing the common returns that had usually

The English in those days had nothing wherewithal to purchase
the pay and provisions of their armies in foreign countries, but

been consumed in the country. In the midst of the most destructive foreign war, therefore, the greater part of manufactures may

either the rude produce of the soil, of which no considerable part
could be spared from the home consumption, or a few manufac-

frequently flourish greatly; and, on the contrary, they may decline
on the return of peace. They may flourish amidst the ruin of their

tures of the coarsest kind, of which, as well as of the rude produce,
the transportation was too expensive. This inability did not arise

country, and begin to decay upon the return of its prosperity. The
different state of many different branches of the British manufac-

from the want of money, but of the finer and more improved
manufactures. Buying and selling was transacted by means of

tures during the late war, and for some time after the peace, may
serve as an illustration of what has been just now said.

money in England then as well as now. The quantity of circulating money must have borne the same proportion, to the number

No foreign war, of great expense or duration, could conveniently

and value of purchases and sales usually transacted at that time,

355

The Wealth of Nations
which it does to those transacted at present; or, rather, it must
have borne a greater proportion, because there was then no paper,

ing king, as the most essential measure for securing the succession. The sovereigns of improved and commercial countries are

which now occupies a great part of the employment of gold and
silver. Among nations to whom commerce and manufactures are

not under the same necessity of accumulating treasures, because
they can generally draw from their subjects extraordinary aids upon

little known, the sovereign, upon extraordinary occasions, can seldom draw any considerable aid from his subjects, for reasons which

extraordinary occasions. They are likewise less disposed to do so.
They naturally, perhaps necessarily, follow the mode of the times;

shall be explained hereafter. It is in such countries, therefore, that
he generally endeavours to accumulate a treasure, as the only re-

and their expense comes to be regulated by the same extravagant
vanity which directs that of all the other great proprietors in their

source against such emergencies. Independent of this necessity, he
is, in such a situation, naturally disposed to the parsimony requi-

dominions. The insignificant pageantry of their court becomes
every day more brilliant; and the expense of it not only prevents

site for accumulation. In that simple state, the expense even of a
sovereign is not directed by the vanity which delights in the gaudy

accumulation, but frequently encroaches upon the funds destined
for more necessary expenses. What Dercyllidas said of the court of

finery of a court, but is employed in bounty to his tenants, and
hospitality to his retainers. But bounty and hospitality very sel-

Persia, may be applied to that of several European princes, that he
saw there much splendour, but little strength, and many servants,

dom lead to extravagance; though vanity almost always does. Every Tartar chief, accordingly, has a treasure. The treasures of Mazepa,

but few soldiers.
The importation of gold and silver is not the principal, much

chief of the Cossacks in the Ukraine, the famous ally of Charles
XII., are said to have been very great. The French kings of the

less the sole benefit, which a nation derives from its foreign trade.
Between whatever places foreign trade is carried on, they all of

Merovingian race had all treasures. When they divided their kingdom among their different children, they divided their treasures

them derive two distinct benefits from it. It carries out that surplus part of the produce of their land and labour for which there is

too. The Saxon princes, and the first kings after the Conquest,
seem likewise to have accumulated treasures. The first exploit of

no demand among them, and brings back in return for it something else for which there is a demand. It gives a value to their

every new reign was commonly to seize the treasure of the preced-

superfluities, by exchanging them for something else, which may

356

Adam Smith
satisfy a part of their wants and increase their enjoyments. By means
of it, the narrowness of the home market does not hinder the

can now be purchased for about a third part of the corn, or a third
part of the labour, which it would have cost in the fifteenth cen-

division of labour in any particular branch of art or manufacture
from being carried to the highest perfection. By opening a more

tury. With the same annual expense of labour and commodities,
Europe can annually purchase about three times the quantity of

extensive market for whatever part of the produce of their labour
may exceed the home consumption, it encourages them to im-

plate which it could have purchased at that time. But when a commodity comes to be sold for a third part of what bad been its usual

prove its productive power, and to augment its annual produce to
the utmost, and thereby to increase the real revenue and wealth of

price, not only those who purchased it before can purchase three
times their former quantity, but it is brought down to the level of

the society. These great and important services foreign trade is
continually occupied in performing to all the different countries

a much greater number of purchasers, perhaps to more than ten,
perhaps to more than twenty times the former number. So that

between which it is carried on. They all derive great benefit from
it, though that in which the merchant resides generally derives the

there may be in Europe at present, not only more than three times,
but more than twenty or thirty times the quantity of plate which

greatest, as he is generally more employed in supplying the wants,
and carrying out the superfluities of his own, than of any other

would have been in it, even in its present state of improvement,
had the discovery of the American mines never been made. So far

particular country. To import the gold and silver which may be
wanted into the countries which have no mines, is, no doubt a

Europe has, no doubt, gained a real conveniency, though surely a
very trifling one. The cheapness of gold and silver renders those

part of the business of foreign commerce. It is, however, a most
insignificant part of it. A country which carried on foreign trade

metals rather less fit for the purposes of money than they were
before. In order to make the same purchases, we must load our-

merely upon this account, could scarce have occasion to freight a
ship in a century.

selves with a greater quantity of them, and carry about a shilling
in our pocket, where a groat would have done before. It is difficult

It is not by the importation of gold and silver that the discovery
of America has enriched Europe. By the abundance of the Ameri-

to say which is most trifling, this inconveniency, or the opposite
conveniency. Neither the one nor the other could have made any

can mines, those metals have become cheaper. A service of plate

very essential change in the state of Europe. The discovery of

357

The Wealth of Nations
America, however, certainly made a most essential one. By opening a new and inexhaustible market to all the commodities of

Japan, as well as several others in the East Indies, without having
richer mines of gold or silver, were, in every other respect, much

Europe, it gave occasion to new divisions of labour and improvements of art, which in the narrow circle of the ancient commerce

richer, better cultivated, and more advanced in all arts and manufactures, than either Mexico or Peru, even though we should credit,

could never have taken place, for want of a market to take off the
greater part of their produce. The productive powers of labour

what plainly deserves no credit, the exaggerated accounts of the
Spanish writers concerning the ancient state of those empires. But

were improved, and its produce increased in all the different countries of Europe, and together with it the real revenue and wealth of

rich and civilized nations can always exchange to a much greater
value with one another, than with savages and barbarians. Eu-

the inhabitants. The commodities of Europe were almost all new
to America, and many of those of America were new to Europe. A

rope, however, has hitherto derived much less advantage from its
commerce with the East Indies, than from that with America. The

new set of exchanges, therefore, began to take place, which had
never been thought of before, and which should naturally have

Portuguese monopolized the East India trade to themselves for
about a century; and it was only indirectly, and through them,

proved as advantageous to the new, as it certainly did to the old
continent. The savage injustice of the Europeans rendered an event,

that the other nations of Europe could either send out or receive
any goods from that country. When the Dutch, in the beginning

which ought to have been beneficial to all, ruinous and destructive to several of those unfortunate countries.

of the last century, began to encroach upon them, they vested
their whole East India commerce in an exclusive company. The

The discovery of a passage to the East Indies by the Cape of
Good Hope, which happened much about the same time, opened

English, French, Swedes, and Danes, have all followed their example; so that no great nation of Europe has ever yet had the

perhaps a still more extensive range to foreign commerce, than
even that of America, notwithstanding the greater distance. There

benefit of a free commerce to the East Indies. No other reason
need be assigned why it has never been so advantageous as the

were but two nations in America, in any respect, superior to the
savages, and these were destroyed almost as soon as discovered.

trade to America, which, between almost every nation of Europe
and its own colonies, is free to all its subjects. The exclusive privi-

The rest were mere savages. But the empires of China, Indostan,

leges of those East India companies, their great riches, the great

358

Adam Smith
favour and protection which these have procured them from their
respective governments, have excited much envy against them.

pean commodities, and consequently the real wealth and revenue
of Europe. That it has hitherto increased them so little, is prob-

This envy has frequently represented their trade as altogether pernicious, on account of the great quantities of silver which it every

ably owing to the restraints which it everywhere labours under.
I thought it necessary, though at the hazard of being tedious, to

year exports from the countries from which it is carried on. The
parties concerned have replied, that their trade by this continual

examine at full length this popular notion, that wealth consists in
money or in gold and silver. Money, in common language, as I

exportation of silver, might indeed tend to impoverish Europe in
general, but not the particular country from which it was carried

have already observed, frequently signifies wealth; and this ambiguity of expression has rendered this popular notion so familiar to

on; because, by the exportation of a part of the returns to other
European countries, it annually brought home a much greater

us, that even they who are convinced of its absurdity, are very apt
to forget their own principles, and, in the course of their reason-

quantity of that metal than it carried out. Both the objection and
the reply are founded in the popular notion which I have been

ings, to take it for granted as a certain and undeniable truth. Some
of the best English writers upon commerce set out with observ-

just now examining. It is therefore unnecessary to say any thing
further about either. By the annual exportation of silver to the

ing, that the wealth of a country consists, not in its gold and silver
only, but in its lands, houses, and consumable goods of all differ-

East Indies, plate is probably somewhat dearer in Europe than it
otherwise might have been; and coined silver probably purchases

ent kinds. In the course of their reasonings, however, the lands,
houses, and consumable goods, seem to slip out of their memory;

a larger quantity both of labour and commodities. The former of
these two effects is a very small loss, the latter a very small advan-

and the strain of their argument frequently supposes that all wealth
consists in gold and silver, and that to multiply those metals is the

tage; both too insignificant to deserve any part of the public attention. The trade to the East Indies, by opening a market to the

great object of national industry and commerce.
The two principles being established, however, that wealth con-

commodities of Europe, or, what comes nearly to the same thing,
to the gold and silver which is purchased with those commodities,

sisted in gold and silver, and that those metals could be brought
into a country which had no mines, only by the balance of trade,

must necessarily tend to increase the annual production of Euro-

or by exporting to a greater value than it imported; it necessarily

359

The Wealth of Nations
became the great object of political economy to diminish as much
as possible the importation of foreign goods for home consump-

order to be exported again, either the whole or a part of this duty
was sometimes given back upon such exportation.

tion, and to increase as much as possible the exportation of the
produce of domestic industry. Its two great engines for enriching

Bounties were given for the encouragement, either of some beginning manufactures, or of such sorts of industry of other kinds

the country, therefore, were restraints upon importation, and encouragement to exportation.

as were supposed to deserve particular favour.
By advantageous treaties of commerce, particular privileges were

The restraints upon importation were of two kinds.
First, restraints upon the importation of such foreign goods for

procured in some foreign state for the goods and merchants of the
country, beyond what were granted to those of other countries.

home consumption as could be produced at home, from whatever country they were imported.

By the establishment of colonies in distant countries, not only
particular privileges, but a monopoly was frequently procured for

Secondly, restraints upon the importation of goods of almost all
kinds, from those particular countries with which the balance of

the goods and merchants of the country which established them.
The two sorts of restraints upon importation above mentioned,

trade was supposed to be disadvantageous.
Those different restraints consisted sometimes in high duties,

together with these four encouragements to exportation, constitute the six principal means by which the commercial system pro-

and sometimes in absolute prohibitions.
Exportation was encouraged sometimes by drawbacks, some-

poses to increase the quantity of gold and silver in any country, by
turning the balance of trade in its favour. I shall consider each of

times by bounties, sometimes by advantageous treaties of commerce with foreign states, and sometimes by the establishment of

them in a particular chapter, and, without taking much farther
notice of their supposed tendency to bring money into the coun-

colonies in distant countries.
Drawbacks were given upon two different occasions. When the

try, I shall examine chiefly what are likely to be the effects of each
of them upon the annual produce of its industry. According as

home manufactures were subject to any duty or excise, either the
whole or a part of it was frequently drawn back upon their expor-

they tend either to increase or diminish the value of this annual
produce, they must evidently tend either to increase or diminish

tation; and when foreign goods liable to a duty were imported, in

the real wealth and revenue of the country.

360

Adam Smith

CHAPTER II

a monopoly against their countrymen. The variety of goods, of
which the importation into Great Britain is prohibited, either ab-

OF RESTRAINTS UPON IMPORTATION
FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES OF SUCH
GOODS AS CAN BE PRODUCED AT
HOME

solutely, or under certain circumstances, greatly exceeds what can
easily be suspected by those who are not well acquainted with the
laws of the customs.
That this monopoly of the home market frequently gives great

BY RESTRAINING, either by high duties, or by absolute prohibitions,

encouragement to that particular species of industry which enjoys
it, and frequently turns towards that employment a greater share

the importation of such goods from foreign countries as can be
produced at home, the monopoly of the home market is more or

of both the labour and stock of the society than would otherwise
have gone to it, cannot be doubted. But whether it tends either to

less secured to the domestic industry employed in producing them.
Thus the prohibition of importing either live cattle or salt provi-

increase the general industry of the society, or to give it the most
advantageous direction, is not, perhaps, altogether so evident.

sions from foreign countries, secures to the graziers of Great Britain the monopoly of the home market for butcher’s meat. The

The general industry of the society can never exceed what the
capital of the society can employ. As the number of workmen that

high duties upon the importation of corn, which, in times of
moderate plenty, amount to a prohibition, give a like advantage to

can be kept in employment by any particular person must bear a
certain proportion to his capital, so the number of those that can

the growers of that commodity. The prohibition of the importation of foreign woollen is equally favourable to the woollen manu-

be continually employed by all the members of a great society
must bear a certain proportion to the whole capital of the society,

facturers. The silk manufacture, though altogether employed upon
foreign materials, has lately obtained the same advantage. The linen

and never can exceed that proportion. No regulation of commerce
can increase the quantity of industry in any society beyond what

manufacture has not yet obtained it, but is making great strides
towards it. Many other sorts of manufactures have, in the same

its capital can maintain. It can only divert a part of it into a direction into which it might not otherwise have gone; and it is by no

manner obtained in Great Britain, either altogether, or very nearly,

means certain that this artificial direction is likely to be more ad-

361

The Wealth of Nations
vantageous to the society, than that into which it would have gone
of its own accord.

brought home, or placed under his own immediate view and command. The capital which an Amsterdam merchant employs in

Every individual is continually exerting himself to find out the
most advantageous employment for whatever capital he can com-

carrying corn from Koningsberg to Lisbon, and fruit and wine
from Lisbon to Koningsberg, must generally be the one half of it

mand. It is his own advantage, indeed, and not that of the society,
which he has in view. But the study of his own advantage natu-

at Koningsberg, and the other half at Lisbon. No part of it need
ever come to Amsterdam. The natural residence of such a mer-

rally, or rather necessarily, leads him to prefer that employment
which is most advantageous to the society.

chant should either be at Koningsberg or Lisbon; and it can only
be some very particular circumstances which can make him prefer

First, every individual endeavours to employ his capital as near
home as he can, and consequently as much as he can in the sup-

the residence of Amsterdam. The uneasiness, however, which he
feels at being separated so far from his capital, generally deter-

port of domestic industry, provided always that he can thereby
obtain the ordinary, or not a great deal less than the ordinary prof-

mines him to bring part both of the Koningsberg goods which he
destines for the market of Lisbon, and of the Lisbon goods which

its of stock.
Thus, upon equal, or nearly equal profits, every wholesale mer-

he destines for that of Koningsberg, to Amsterdam; and though
this necessarily subjects him to a double charge of loading and

chant naturally prefers the home trade to the foreign trade of consumption, and the foreign trade of consumption to the carrying

unloading as well as to the payment of some duties and customs,
yet, for the sake of having some part of his capital always under

trade. In the home trade, his capital is never so long out of his
sight as it frequently is in the foreign trade of consumption. He

his own view and command, he willingly submits to this extraordinary charge; and it is in this manner that every country which

can know better the character and situation of the persons whom
he trusts; and if he should happen to be deceived, he knows better

has any considerable share of the carrying trade, becomes always
the emporium, or general market, for the goods of all the different

the laws of the country from which he must seek redress. In the
carrying trade, the capital of the merchant is, as it were, divided

countries whose trade it carries on. The merchant, in order to save
a second loading and unloading, endeavours always to sell in the

between two foreign countries, and no part of it is ever necessarily

home market, as much of the goods of all those different coun-

362

Adam Smith
tries as he can; and thus, so far as he can, to convert his carrying
trade into a foreign trade of consumption. A merchant, in the

of people of his own country.
Secondly, every individual who employs his capital in the sup-

same manner, who is engaged in the foreign trade of consumption, when he collects goods for foreign markets, will always be

port of domestic industry, necessarily endeavours so to direct that
industry, that its produce may be of the greatest possible value.

glad, upon equal or nearly equal profits, to sell as great a part of
them at home as he can. He saves himself the risk and trouble of

The produce of industry is what it adds to the subject or materials upon which it is employed. In proportion as the value of this

exportation, when, so far as he can, he thus converts his foreign
trade of consumption into a home trade. Home is in this manner

produce is great or small, so will likewise be the profits of the
employer. But it is only for the sake of profit that any man em-

the centre, if I may say so, round which the capitals of the inhabitants of every country are continually circulating, and towards

ploys a capital in the support of industry; and he will always, therefore, endeavour to employ it in the support of that industry of

which they are always tending, though, by particular causes, they
may sometimes be driven off and repelled from it towards more

which the produce is likely to be of the greatest value, or to exchange for the greatest quantity either of money or of other goods.

distant employments. But a capital employed in the home trade,
it has already been shown, necessarily puts into motion a greater

But the annual revenue of every society is always precisely equal
to the exchangeable value of the whole annual produce of its in-

quantity of domestic industry, and gives revenue and employment
to a greater number of the inhabitants of the country, than an

dustry, or rather is precisely the same thing with that exchangeable value. As every individual, therefore, endeavours as much as

equal capital employed in the foreign trade of consumption; and
one employed in the foreign trade of consumption has the same

he can, both to employ his capital in the support of domestic
industry, and so to direct that industry that its produce maybe of

advantage over an equal capital employed in the carrying trade.
Upon equal, or only nearly equal profits, therefore, every indi-

the greatest value; every individual necessarily labours to render
the annual revenue of the society as great as he can. He generally,

vidual naturally inclines to employ his capital in the manner in
which it is likely to afford the greatest support to domestic indus-

indeed, neither intends to promote the public interest, nor knows
how much he is promoting it. By preferring the support of do-

try, and to give revenue and employment to the greatest number

mestic to that of foreign industry, he intends only his own secu-

363

The Wealth of Nations
rity; and by directing that industry in such a manner as its produce may be of the greatest value, he intends only his own gain;

domestic industry, in any particular art or manufacture, is in some
measure to direct private people in what manner they ought to

and he is in this, as in many other cases, led by an invisible hand
to promote an end which was no part of his intention. Nor is it

employ their capitals, and must in almost all cases be either a useless or a hurtful regulation. If the produce of domestic can be

always the worse for the society that it was no part of it. By pursuing his own interest, he frequently promotes that of the society

brought there as cheap as that of foreign industry, the regulation is
evidently useless. If it cannot, it must generally be hurtful. It is the

more effectually than when he really intends to promote it. I have
never known much good done by those who affected to trade for

maxim of every prudent master of a family, never to attempt to
make at home what it will cost him more to make than to buy.

the public good. It is an affectation, indeed, not very common
among merchants, and very few words need be employed in dis-

The tailor does not attempt to make his own shoes, but buys them
of the shoemaker. The shoemaker does not attempt to make his

suading them from it.
What is the species of domestic industry which his capital can

own clothes, but employs a tailor. The farmer attempts to make
neither the one nor the other, but employs those different artifi-

employ, and of which the produce is likely to be of the greatest
value, every individual, it is evident, can in his local situation judge

cers. All of them find it for their interest to employ their whole
industry in a way in which they have some advantage over their

much better than any statesman or lawgiver can do for him. The
statesman, who should attempt to direct private people in what

neighbours, and to purchase with a part of its produce, or, what is
the same thing, with the price of a part of it, whatever else they

manner they ought to employ their capitals, would not only load
himself with a most unnecessary attention, but assume an author-

have occasion for.
What is prudence in the conduct of every private family, can scarce

ity which could safely be trusted, not only to no single person, but
to no council or senate whatever, and which would nowhere be so

be folly In that of a great kingdom. If a foreign country can supply
us with a commodity cheaper than we ourselves can make it, better

dangerous as in the hands of a man who had folly and presumption enough to fancy himself fit to exercise it.

buy it of them with some part of the produce of our own industry,
employed in a way in which we have some advantage. The general

To give the monopoly of the home market to the produce of

industry of the country being always in proportion to the capital

364

Adam Smith
which employs it, will not thereby be diminished, no more than
that of the abovementioned artificers; but only left to find out the

society may be thus carried with advantage into a particular channel
sooner than it could have been otherwise, it will by no means follow

way in which it can be employed with the greatest advantage. It is
certainly not employed to the greatest advantage, when it is thus

that the sum-total, either of its industry, or of its revenue, can ever
be augmented by any such regulation. The industry of the society

directed towards an object which it can buy cheaper than it can
make. The value of its annual produce is certainly more or less di-

can augment only in proportion as its capital augments, and its
capital can augment only in proportion to what can be gradually

minished, when it is thus turned away from producing commodities evidently of more value than the commodity which it is di-

saved out of its revenue. But the immediate effect of every such
regulation is to diminish its revenue; and what diminishes its rev-

rected to produce. According to the supposition, that commodity
could be purchased from foreign countries cheaper than it can be

enue is certainly not very likely to augment its capital faster than it
would have augmented of its own accord, had both capital and

made at home; it could therefore have been purchased with a part
only of the commodities, or, what is the same thing, with a part

industry been left to find out their natural employments.
Though, for want of such regulations, the society should never

only of the price of the commodities, which the industry employed
by an equal capital would have produced at home, had it been left

acquire the proposed manufacture, it would not upon that account necessarily be the poorer in anyone period of its duration.

to follow its natural course. The industry of the country, therefore,
is thus turned away from a more to a less advantageous employ-

In every period of its duration its whole capital and industry might
still have been employed, though upon different objects, in the

ment; and the exchangeable value of its annual produce, instead of
being increased, according to the intention of the lawgiver, must

manner that was most advantageous at the time. In every period
its revenue might have been the greatest which its capital could

necessarily be diminished by every such regulation.
By means of such regulations, indeed, a particular manufacture

afford, and both capital and revenue might have been augmented
with the greatest possible rapidity.

may sometimes be acquired sooner than it could have been otherwise, and after a certain time may be made at home as cheap, or

The natural advantages which one country has over another, in
producing particular commodities, are sometimes so great, that it

cheaper, than in the foreign country. But though the industry of the

is acknowledged by all the world to be in vain to struggle with

365

The Wealth of Nations
them. By means of glasses, hot-beds, and hot-walls, very good
grapes can be raised in Scotland, and very good wine, too, can be

prohibition of the importation of foreign cattle and of salt provisions, together with the high duties upon foreign corn, which in

made of them, at about thirty times the expense for which at least
equally good can be brought from foreign countries. Would it be

times of moderate plenty amount to a prohibition, are not near so
advantageous to the graziers and farmers of Great Britain, as other

a reasonable law to prohibit the importation of all foreign wines,
merely to encourage the making of claret and Burgundy in Scot-

regulations of the same kind are to its merchants and manufacturers. Manufactures, those of the finer kind especially, are more eas-

land? But if there would be a manifest absurdity in turning towards any employment thirty times more of the capital and in-

ily transported from one country to another than corn or cattle. It
is in the fetching and carrying manufactures, accordingly, that

dustry of the country than would be necessary to purchase from
foreign countries an equal quantity of the commodities wanted,

foreign trade is chiefly employed. In manufactures, a very small
advantage will enable foreigners to undersell our own workmen,

there must be an absurdity, though not altogether so glaring, yet
exactly of the same kind, in turning towards any such employ-

even in the home market. It will require a very great one to enable
them to do so in the rude produce of the soil. If the free importa-

ment a thirtieth, or even a three hundredth part more of either.
Whether the advantages which one country has over another be

tion of foreign manufactures were permitted, several of the home
manufactures would probably suffer,and some of them perhaps

natural or acquired, is in this respect of no consequence. As long
as the one country has those advantages, and the other wants them,

go to ruin altogether, and a considerable part of the stock and
industry at present employed in them, would be forced to find

it will always be more advantageous for the latter rather to buy of
the former than to make. It is an acquired advantage only, which

out some other employment. But the freest importation of the
rude produce of the soil could have no such effect upon the agri-

one artificer has over his neighbour, who exercises another trade;
and yet they both find it more advantageous to buy of one an-

culture of the country.
If the importation of foreign cattle, for example, were made

other, than to make what does not belong to their particular trades.
Merchants and manufacturers are the people who derive the

ever so free, so few could be imported, that the grazing trade of
Great Britain could be little affected by it. Live cattle are, perhaps,

greatest advantage from this monopoly of the home market The

the only commodity of which the transportation is more expen-

366

Adam Smith
sive by sea than by land. By land they carry themselves to market.
By sea, not only the cattle, but their food and their water too,

their cattle. But if the exporters had found any great advantage in
continuing the trade, they could easily, when the law was on their

must be carried at no small expense and inconveniency. The short
sea between Ireland and Great Britain, indeed, renders the impor-

side, have conquered this mobbish opposition.
Feeding and fattening countries, besides, must always be highly

tation of Irish cattle more easy. But though the free importation
of them, which was lately permitted only for a limited time, were

improved, whereas breeding countries are generally uncultivated.
The high price of lean cattle, by augmenting the value of unculti-

rendered perpetual, it could have no considerable effect upon the
interest of the graziers of Great Britain. Those parts of Great Brit-

vated land, is like a bounty against improvement. To any country
which was highly improved throughout, it would be more advan-

ain which border upon the Irish sea are all grazing countries. Irish
cattle could never be imported for their use, but must be drove

tageous to import its lean cattle than to breed them. The province
of Holland, accordingly, is said to follow this maxim at present.

through those very extensive countries, at no small expense and
inconveniency, before they could arrive at their proper market.

The mountains of Scotland, Wales, and Northumberland, indeed,
are countries not capable of much improvement, and seem des-

Fat cattle could not be drove so far. Lean cattle, therefore, could
only be imported; and such importation could interfere not with

tined by nature to be the breeding countries of Great Britain. The
freest importation of foreign cattle could have no other effect than

the interest of the feeding or fattening countries, to which, by
reducing the price of lean cattle it would rather be advantageous,

to hinder those breeding countries from taking advantage of the
increasing population and improvement of the rest of the king-

but with that of the breeding countries only. The small number of
Irish cattle imported since their importation was permitted, to-

dom, from raising their price to an exorbitant height, and from
laying a real tax upon all the more improved and cultivated parts

gether with the good price at which lean cattle still continue to
sell, seem to demonstrate, that even the breeding countries of Great

of the country.
The freest importation of salt provisions, in the same manner,

Britain are never likely to be much affected by the free importation of Irish cattle. The common people of Ireland, indeed, are

could have as little effect upon the interest of the graziers of Great
Britain as that of live cattle. Salt provisions are not only a very

said to have sometimes opposed with violence the exportation of

bulky commodity, but when compared with fresh meat they are a

367

The Wealth of Nations
commodity both of worse quality, and, as they cost more labour
and expense, of higher price. They could never, therefore, come

scarcity, than in the actual state of tillage would otherwise take
place. By means of it, the plenty of one year does not compensate

into competition with the fresh meat, though they might with the
salt provisions of the country. They might be used for victualling

the scarcity of another; and as the average quantity exported is
necessarily augmented by it, so must likewise, in the actual state

ships for distant voyages, and such like uses, but could never make
any considerable part of the food of the people. The small quan-

of tillage, the average quantity imported. If there were no bounty,
as less corn would be exported, suit is probable that, one year with

tity of salt provisions imported from Ireland since their importation was rendered free, is an experimental proof that our graziers

another, less would be imported than at present. The corn-merchants, the fetchers and carriers of corn between Great Britain

have nothing to apprehend from it. It does not appear that the
price of butcher’s meat has ever been sensibly affected by it.

and foreign countries, would have much less employment, and
might suffer considerably; but the country gentlemen and farm-

Even the free importation of foreign corn could very little affect
the interest of the farmers of Great Britain. Corn is a much more

ers could suffer very little. It is in the corn-merchants, accordingly, rather than the country gentlemen and farmers, that I have

bulky commodity than butcher’s meat. A pound of wheat at a
penny is as dear as a pound of butcher’s meat at fourpence. The

observed the greatest anxiety for the renewal and continuation of
the bounty.

small quantity of foreign corn imported even in times of the greatest
scarcity, may satisfy our farmers that they can have nothing to fear

Country gentlemen and farmers are, to their great honour, of
all people, the least subject to the wretched spirit of monopoly.

from the freest importation. The average quantity imported, one
year with another, amounts only, according to the very well in-

The undertaker of a great manufactory is sometimes alarmed if
another work of the same kind is established within twenty miles

formed author of the Tracts upon the Corn Trade, to 23,728 quarters of all sorts of grain, and does not exceed the five hundredth

of him; the Dutch undertaker of the woollen manufacture at
Abbeville, stipulated that no work of the same kind should be

and seventy-one part of the annual consumption. But as the bounty
upon corn occasions a greater exportation in years of plenty, so it

established within thirty leagues of that city. Farmers and country
gentlemen, on the contrary, are generally disposed rather to pro-

must, of consequence, occasion a greater importation in years of

mote, than to obstruct, the cultivation and improvement of their

368

Adam Smith
neighbours farms and estates. They have no secrets, such as those
of the greater part of manufacturers, but are generally rather fond

example they followed.
To prohibit, by a perpetual law, the importation of foreign corn

of communicating to their neighbours, and of extending as far as
possible any new practice which they may have found to be ad-

and cattle, is in reality to enact, that the population and industry
of the country shall, at no time, exceed what the rude produce of

vantageous. “Pius quaestus”, says old Cato, “stabilissimusque,
minimeque invidiosus; minimeque male cogitantes sunt, qui in

its own soil can maintain.
There seem, however, to be two cases, in which it will generally

eo studio occupati sunt.” Country gentlemen and farmers, dispersed in different parts of the country, cannot so easily combine

be advantageous to lay some burden upon foreign, for the encouragement of domestic industry.

as merchants and manufacturers, who being collected into towns,
and accustomed to that exclusive corporation spirit which pre-

The first is, when some particular sort of industry is necessary for
the defence of the country. The defence of Great Britain, for ex-

vails in them, naturally endeavour to obtain, against all their countrymen, the same exclusive privilege which they generally possess

ample, depends very much upon the number of its sailors and shipping. The act of navigation, therefore, very properly endeavours to

against the inhabitants of their respective towns. They accordingly
seem to have been the original inventors of those restraints upon

give the sailors and shipping of Great Britain the monopoly of the
trade of their own country, in some cases, by absolute prohibitions,

the importation of foreign goods, which secure to them the monopoly of the home market. It was probably in imitation of them,

and in others, by heavy burdens upon the shipping of foreign countries. The following are the principal dispositions of this act.

and to put themselves upon a level with those who, they found,
were disposed to oppress them, that the country gentlemen and

First, All ships, of which the owners, masters, and three-fourths
of the mariners, are not British subjects, are prohibited, upon pain

farmers of Great Britain so far forgot the generosity which is natural to their station, as to demand the exclusive privilege of supply-

of forfeiting ship and cargo, from trading to the British settlements and plantations, or from being employed in the coasting

ing their countrymen with corn and butcher’s meat. They did not,
perhaps, take time to consider how much less their interest could

trade of Great Britain.
Secondly, A great variety of the most bulky articles of importa-

be affected by the freedom of trade, than that of the people whose

tion can be brought into Great Britain only, either in such ships as

369

The Wealth of Nations
are above described, or in ships of the country where those goods
are produced, and of which the owners, masters, and three-fourths

By this regulation, a very heavy burden was laid upon their supplying Great Britain.

of the mariners, are of that particular country; and when imported
even in ships of this latter kind, they are subject to double aliens

When the act of navigation was made, though England and
Holland were not actually at war, the most violent animosity sub-

duty. If imported in ships of any other country, the penalty is
forfeiture of ship and goods. When this act was made, the Dutch

sisted between the two nations. It had begun during the government of the long parliament, which first framed this act, and it

were, what they still are, the great carriers of Europe; and by this
regulation they were entirely excluded from being the carriers to

broke out soon after in the Dutch wars, during that of the Protector and of Charles II. It is not impossible, therefore, that some of

Great Britain, or from importing to us the goods of any other
European country.

the regulations of this famous act may have proceeded from national animosity. They are as wise, however, as if they had all been

Thirdly, A great variety of the most bulky articles of importation are prohibited from being imported, even in British ships,

dictated by the most deliberate wisdom. National animosity, at
that particular time, aimed at the very same object which the most

from any country but that in which they are produced, under
pain of forfeiting ship and cargo. This regulation, too, was prob-

deliberate wisdom would have recommended, the diminution of
the naval power of Holland, the only naval power which could

ably intended against the Dutch. Holland was then, as now, the
great emporium for all European goods; and by this regulation,

endanger the security of England.
The act of navigation is not favourable to foreign commerce, or

British ships were hindered from loading in Holland the goods of
any other European country.

to the growth of that opulence which can arise from it. The interest of a nation, in its commercial relations to foreign nations, is,

Fourthly, Salt fish of all kinds, whale fins, whalebone, oil, and
blubber, not caught by and cured on board British vessels, when

like that of a merchant with regard to the different people with
whom he deals, to buy as cheap, and to sell as dear as possible. But

imported into Great Britain, are subject to double aliens duty.
The Dutch, as they are still the principal, were then the only fish-

it will be most likely to buy cheap, when, by the most perfect
freedom of trade, it encourages all nations to bring to it the goods

ers in Europe that attempted to supply foreign nations with fish.

which it has occasion to purchase; and, for the same reason, it will

370

Adam Smith
be most likely to sell dear, when its markets are thus filled with the
greatest number of buyers. The act of navigation, it is true, lays no

and labour of the country, than what would naturally go to it. It
would only hinder any part of what would naturally go to it from

burden upon foreign ships that come to export the produce of
British industry. Even the ancient aliens duty, which used to be

being turned away by the tax into a less natural direction, and would
leave the competition between foreign and domestic industry, after

paid upon all goods, exported as well as imported, has, by several
subsequent acts, been taken off from the greater part of the ar-

the tax, as nearly as possible upon the same footing as before it. In
Great Britain, when any such tax is laid upon the produce of do-

ticles of exportation. But if foreigners, either by prohibitions or
high duties, are hindered from coming to sell, they cannot always

mestic industry, it is usual, at the same time, in order to stop the
clamorous complaints of our merchants and manufacturers, that

afford to come to buy; because, coming without a cargo, they
must lose the freight from their own country to Great Britain. By

they will be undersold at home, to lay a much heavier duty upon
the importation of all foreign goods of the same kind.

diminishing the number of sellers, therefore, we necessarily diminish that of buyers, and are thus likely not only to buy foreign

This second limitation of the freedom of trade, according to
some people, should, upon most occasions, be extended much

goods dearer, but to sell our own cheaper, than if there was a more
perfect freedom of trade. As defence, however, is of much more

farther than to the precise foreign commodities which could come
into competition with those which had been taxed at home. When

importance than opulence, the act of navigation is, perhaps, the
wisest of all the commercial regulations of England.

the necessaries of life have been taxed in any country, it becomes
proper, they pretend, to tax not only the like necessaries of life

The second case, in which it will generally be advantageous to lay
some burden upon foreign for the encouragement of domestic in-

imported from other countries, but all sorts of foreign goods which
can come into competition with any thing that is the produce of

dustry, is when some tax is imposed at home upon the produce of
the latter. In this case, it seems reasonable that an equal tax should

domestic industry. Subsistence, they say, becomes necessarily dearer
in consequence of such taxes; and the price of labour must always

be imposed upon the like produce of the former. This would not
give the monopoly of the borne market to domestic industry, nor

rise with the price of the labourer’s subsistence. Every commodity,
therefore, which is the produce of domestic industry, though not

turn towards a particular employment a greater share of the stock

immediately taxed itself, becomes dearer in consequence of such

371

The Wealth of Nations
taxes, because the labour which produces it becomes so. Such taxes,
therefore, are really equivalent, they say, to a tax upon every par-

exactness, the tax of every foreign, to the enhancement of the price
of every home commodity.

ticular commodity produced at home. In order to put domestic
upon the same footing with foreign industry, therefore, it becomes

Secondly, Taxes upon the necessaries of life have nearly the same
effect upon the circumstances of the people as a poor soil and a

necessary, they think, to lay some duty upon every foreign commodity, equal to this enhancement of the price of the home com-

bad climate. Provisions are thereby rendered dearer, in the same
manner as if it required extraordinary labour and expense to raise

modities with which it can come into competition.
Whether taxes upon the necessaries of life, such as those in Great

them. As, in the natural scarcity arising from soil and climate, it
would be absurd to direct the people in what manner they ought

Britain upon soap, salt, leather, candles, etc. necessarily raise the
price of labour, and consequently that of all other commodities, I

to employ their capitals and industry, so is it likewise in the artificial scarcity arising from such taxes. To be left to accommodate, as

shall consider hereafter, when I come to treat of taxes. Supposing,
however, in the mean time, that they have this effect, and they

well as they could, their industry to their situation, and to find
out those employments in which, notwithstanding their

have it undoubtedly, this general enhancement of the price of all
commodities, in consequence of that labour, is a case which dif-

unfavourable circumstances, they might have some advantage either in the home or in the foreign market, is what, in both cases,

fers in the two following respects from that of a particular commodity, of which the price was enhanced by a particular tax im-

would evidently be most for their advantage. To lay a new-tax
upon them, because they are already overburdened with taxes, and

mediately imposed upon it.
First, It might always be known with great exactness, how far

because they already pay too dear for the necessaries of life, to
make them likewise pay too dear for the greater part of other com-

the price of such a commodity could be enhanced by such a tax;
but how far the general enhancement of the price of labour might

modities, is certainly a most absurd way of making amends.
Such taxes, when they have grown up to a certain height, are a

affect that of every different commodity about which labour was
employed, could never be known with any tolerable exactness. It

curse equal to the barrenness of the earth, and the inclemency of
the heavens, and yet it is in the richest and most industrious coun-

would be impossible, therefore, to proportion, with any tolerable

tries that they have been most generally imposed. No other coun-

372

Adam Smith
tries could support so great a disorder. As the strongest bodies
only can live and enjoy health under an unwholesome regimen, so

The French have been particularly forward to favour their own
manufactures, by restraining the importation of such foreign goods

the nations only, that in every sort of industry have the greatest
natural and acquired advantages, can subsist and prosper under

as could come into competition with them. In this consisted a
great part of the policy of Mr Colbert, who, notwithstanding his

such taxes. Holland is the country in Europe in which they abound
most, and which, from peculiar circumstances, continues to pros-

great abilities, seems in this case to have been imposed upon by
the sophistry of merchants and manufacturers, who are always

per, not by means of them, as has been most absurdly supposed,
but in spite of them.

demanding a monopoly against their countrymen. It is at present
the opinion of the most intelligent men in France, that his opera-

As there are two cases in which it will generally be advantageous
to lay some burden upon foreign for the encouragement of do-

tions of this kind have not been beneficial to his country. That
minister, by the tariff of 1667, imposed very high duties upon a

mestic industry, so there are two others in which it may sometimes be a matter of deliberation, in the one, how far it is proper

great number of foreign manufactures. Upon his refusing to moderate them in favour of the Dutch, they, in 1671, prohibited the

to continue the free importation of certain foreign goods; and, in
the other, how far, or in what manner, it may be proper to restore

importation of the wines, brandies, and manufactures of France.
The war of 1672 seems to have been in part occasioned by this

that free importation, after it has been for some time interrupted.
The case in which it may sometimes be a matter of deliberation

commercial dispute. The peace of Nimeguen put an end to it in
1678, by moderating some of those duties in favour of the Dutch,

how far it is proper to continue the free importation of certain
foreign goods, is when some foreign nation restrains, by high du-

who in consequence took off their prohibition. It was about the
same time that the French and English began mutually to oppress

ties or prohibitions, the importation of some of our manufactures
into their country. Revenge, in this case, naturally dictates retalia-

each other’s industry, by the like duties and prohibitions, of which
the French, however, seem to have set the first example, The spirit

tion, and that we should impose the like duties and prohibitions
upon the importation of some or all of their manufactures into

of hostility which has subsisted between the two nations ever since,
has hitherto hindered them from being moderated on either side.

ours. Nations, accordingly, seldom fail to retaliate in this manner.

In 1697, the Ehglish prohibited the importation of bone lace, the

373

The Wealth of Nations
manufacture of Flanders. The government of that country, at that
time under the dominion of Spain, prohibited, in return, the im-

seldom affect them considerably, but some other manufacture of
theirs. This may, no doubt, give encouragement to some particu-

portation of English woollens. In 1700, the prohibition of importing bone lace into England was taken oft; upon condition

lar class of workmen among ourselves, and, by excluding some of
their rivals, may enable them to raise their price in the home mar-

that the importation of English woollens into Flanders should be
put on the same footing as before.

ket. Those workmen however, who suffered by our neighbours
prohibition, will not be benefited by ours. On the contrary, they,

There may be good policy in retaliations of this kind, when
there is a probability that they will procure the repeal of the high

and almost all the other classes of our citizens, will thereby be
obliged to pay dearer than before for certain goods. Every such

duties or prohibitions complained of. The recovery of a great foreign market will generally more than compensate the transitory

law, therefore, imposes a real tax upon the whole country, not in
favour of that particular class of workmen who were injured by

inconveniency of paying dearer during a short time for some sorts
of goods. To judge whether such retaliations are likely to produce

our neighbours prohibitions, but of some other class.
The case in which it may sometimes be a matter of deliberation,

such an effect, does not, perhaps, belong so much to the science of
a legislator, whose deliberations ought to be governed by general

how far, or in what manner, it is proper to restore the free importation of foreign goods, after it has been for some time interrupted,

principles, which are always the same, as to the skill of that insidious and crafty animal vulgarly called a statesman or politician,

is when particular manufactures, by means of high duties or prohibitions upon all foreign goods which can come into competi-

whose councils are directed by the momentary fluctuations of affairs. When there is no probability that any such repeal can be

tion with them, have been so far extended as to employ a great
multitude of hands. Humanity may in this case require that the

procured, it seems a bad method of compensating the injury done
to certain classes of our people, to do another injury ourselves,

freedom of trade should be restored only by slow gradations, and
with a good deal of reserve and circumspection. Were those high

not only to those classes, but to almost all the other classes of
them. When our neighbours prohibit some manufacture of ours,

duties and prohibitions taken away all at once, cheaper foreign
goods of the same kind might be poured so fast into the home

we generally prohibit, not only the same, for that alone would

market, as to deprive all at once many thousands of our people of

374

Adam Smith
their ordinary employment and means of subsistence. The disorder which this would occasion might no doubt be very consider-

restoring the freedom of trade, be thrown all at once out of their
ordinary employment and common method of subsistence, it

able. It would in all probability, however, be much less than is
commonly imagined, for the two following reasons.

would by no means follow that they would thereby be deprived
either of employment or subsistence. By the reduction of the army

First, All those manufactures of which any part is commonly
exported to other European countries without a bounty, could be

and navy at the end of the late war, more than 100,000 soldiers
and seamen, a number equal to what is employed in the greatest

very little affected by the freest importation of foreign goods. Such
manufactures must be sold as cheap abroad as any other foreign

manufactures, were all at once thrown out of their ordinary employment: but though they no doubt suffered some inconveniency,

goods of the same quality and kind, and consequently must be
sold cheaper at home. They would still, therefore, keep possession

they were not thereby deprived of all employment and subsistence.
The greater part of the seamen, it is probable, gradually betook

of the home market; and though a capricious man of fashion might
sometimes prefer foreign wares, merely because they were foreign,

themselves to the merchant service as they could find occasion,
and in the mean time both they and the soldiers were absorbed in

to cheaper and better goods of the same kind that were made at
home, this folly could, from the nature of things, extend to so few,

the great mass of the people, and employed in a great variety of
occupations. Not only no great convulsion, but no sensible disor-

that it could make no sensible impression upon the general employment of the people. But a great part of all the different branches

der, arose from so great a change in the situation of more than
100,000 men, all accustomed to the use of arms, and many of

of our woollen manufacture, of our tanned leather, and of our
hardware, are annually exported to other European countries with-

them to rapine and plunder. The number of vagrants was scarce
anywhere sensibly increased by it; even the wages of labour were

out any bounty, and these are the manufactures which employ the
greatest number of hands. The silk, perhaps, is the manufacture

not reduced by it in any occupation, so far as I have been able to
learn, except in that of seamen in the merchant service. But if we

which would suffer the most by this freedom of trade, and after it
the linen, though the latter much less than the former.

compare together the habits of a soldier and of any sort of manufacturer, we shall find that those of the latter do not tend so much

Secondly, Though a great number of people should, by thus

to disqualify him from being employed in a new trade, as those of

375

The Wealth of Nations
the former from being employed in any. The manufacturer has
always been accustomed to look for his subsistence from his labour

are really encroachments upon natural Liberty, and add to those the
repeal of the law of settlements, so that a poor workman, when

only; the soldier to expect it from his pay. Application and industry have been familiar to the one; idleness and dissipation to the

thrown out of employment, either in one trade or in one place, may
seek for it in another trade or in another place, without the fear

other. But it is surely much easier to change the direction of industry from one sort of labour to another, than to turn idleness

either of a prosecution or of a removal; and neither the public nor
the individuals will suffer much more from the occasional disband-

and dissipation to any. To the greater part of manufactures, besides, it has already been observed, there are other collateral manu-

ing some particular classes of manufacturers, than from that of the
soldiers. Our manufacturers have no doubt great merit with their

factures of so similar a nature, that a workman can easily transfer
his industry from one of them to another. The greater part of such

country, but they cannot have more than those who defend it with
their blood, nor deserve to be treated with more delicacy.

workmen, too, are occasionally employed in country labour. The
stock which employed them in a particular manufacture before,

To expect, indeed, that the freedom of trade should ever be entirely restored in Great Britain, is as absurd as to expect that an

will still remain in the country, to employ an equal number of
people in some other way. The capital of the country remaining

Oceana or Utopia should ever be established in it. Not only the
prejudices of the public, but, what is much more unconquerable,

the same, the demand for labour will likewise be the same, or very
nearly the same, though it may be exerted in different places, and

the private interests of many individuals, irresistibly oppose it.
Were the officers of the army to oppose, with the same zeal and

for different occupations. Soldiers and seamen, indeed, when discharged from the king’s service, are at liberty to exercise any trade

unanimity, any reduction in the number of forces, with which
master manufacturers set themselves against every law that is likely

within any town or place of Great Britain or Ireland. Let the same
natural liberty of exercising what species of industry they please,

to increase the number of their rivals in the home market; were
the former to animate their soldiers. In the same manner as the

be restored to all his Majesty’s subjects, in the same manner as to
soldiers and seamen; that is, break down the exclusive privileges of

latter inflame their workmen, to attack with violence and outrage
the proposers of any such regulation; to attempt to reduce the

corporations, and repeal the statute of apprenticeship, both which

army would be as dangerous as it has now become to attempt to

376

Adam Smith
diminish, in any respect, the monopoly which our manufacturers
have obtained against us. This monopoly has so much increased

the instruments of trade, could scarce be disposed of without considerable loss. The equitable regard, therefore, to his interest, re-

the number of some particular tribes of them, that, like an overgrown standing army, they have become formidable to the gov-

quires that changes of this kind should never be introduced suddenly, but slowly, gradually, and after a very long warning. The

ernment, and, upon many occasions, intimidate the legislature.
The member of parliament who supports every proposal for

legislature, were it possible that its deliberations could be always
directed, not by the clamorous importunity of partial interests,

strengthening this monopoly, is sure to acquire not only the reputation of understanding trade, but great popularity and influence

but by an extensive view of the general good, ought, upon this
very account, perhaps, to be particularly careful, neither to estab-

with an order of men whose numbers and wealth render them of
great importance. If he opposes them, on the contrary, and still

lish any new monopolies of this kind, nor to extend further those
which are already established. Every such regulation introduces

more, if he has authority enough to be able to thwart them, neither the most acknowledged probity, nor the highest rank, nor the

some degree of real disorder into the constitution of the state,
which it will be difficult afterwards to cure without occasioning

greatest public services, can protect him from the most infamous
abuse and detraction, from personal insults, nor sometimes from

another disorder.
How far it may be proper to impose taxes upon the importation

real danger, arising from the insolent outrage of furious and disappointed monopolists.

of foreign goods, in order not to prevent their importation, but to
raise a revenue for government, I shall consider hereafter when I

The undertaker of a great manufacture, who, by the home markets being suddenly laid open to the competition of foreigners,

come to treat of taxes. Taxes imposed with a view to prevent, or
even to diminish importation, are evidently as destructive of the

should be obliged to abandon his trade, would no doubt suffer
very considerably. That part of his capital which had usually been

revenue of the customs as of the freedom of trade.

employed in purchasing materials, and in paying his workmen,
might, without much difficulty, perhaps, find another employment; but that part of it which was fixed in workhouses, and in

377

The Wealth of Nations

CHAPTER III

per cent. of the rate or value, was laid upon all French goods;
while the goods of other nations were, the greater part of them,

OF THE EXTRAORDINARY RESTRAINTS
UPON THE IMPORTATION OF GOODS
OF ALMOST ALL KINDS, FROM THOSE
COUNTRIES WITH WHICH THE BALANCE IS SUPPOSED TO BE DISADVANTAGEOUS

subjected to much lighter duties, seldom exceeding five per cent.
The wine, brandy, salt, and vinegar of France, were indeed ex-

Part I — Of the Unreasonableness of those Restraints, even
upon the-Principles of the Commercial System.

cepted; these commodities being subjected to other heavy duties,
either by other laws, or by particular clauses of the same law. In
1696, a second duty of twenty-five per cent. the first not having
been thought a sufficient discouragement, was imposed upon all
French goods, except brandy; together with a new duty of fiveand-twenty pounds upon the ton of French wine, and another of
fifteen pounds upon the ton of French vinegar. French goods have
never been omitted in any of those general subsidies or duties of

TO LAY EXTRAORDINARY RESTRAINTS upon the importation of goods
of almost all kinds, from those particular countries with which

five per cent. which have been imposed upon all, or the greater
part, of the goods enumerated in the book of rates. If we count

the balance of trade is supposed to be disadvantageous, is the second expedient by which the commercial system proposes to in-

the one-third and two-third subsidies as making a complete subsidy between them, there have been five of these general subsidies;

crease the quantity of gold and silver. Thus, in Great Britain, Silesia
lawns may be imported for home consumption, upon paying cer-

so that, before the commencement of the present war, seventyfive per cent. may be considered as the lowest duty to which the

tain duties; but French cambrics and lawns are prohibited to be
imported, except into the port of London, there to be warehoused

greater part of the goods of the growth, produce, or manufacture
of France, were liable. But upon the greater part of goods, those

for exportation. Higher duties are imposed upon the wines of
France than upon those of Portugal, or indeed of any other coun-

duties are equivalent to a prohibition. The French, in their turn,
have, I believe, treated our goods and manufactures just as hardly;

try. By what is called the impost 1692, a duty of five and-twenty

though I am not so well acquainted with the particular hardships

378

Adam Smith
which they have imposed upon them. Those mutual restraints
have put an end to almost all fair commerce between the two

other two countries. This would be the case, even upon the supposition that the whole French goods imported were to be con-

nations; and smugglers are now the principal importers, either of
British goods into France, or of French goods into Great Britain.

sumed in Great Britain.
But, Secondly, A great part of them might be re-exported to

The principles which I have been examining, in the foregoing
chapter, took their origin from private interest and the spirit of

other countries, where, being sold with profit, they might bring
back a return, equal in value, perhaps, to the prime cost of the

monopoly; those which I am going te examine in this, from national prejudice and animosity. They are, accordingly, as might

whole French goods imported. What has frequently been said of
the East India trade, might possibly be true of the French; that

well be expected, still more unreasonable. They are so, even upon
the principles of the commercial system.

though the greater part of East India goods were bought with gold
and silver, the re-exportation of a part of them to other countries

First, Though it were certain that in the case of a free trade
between France and England, for example, the balance would be

brought back more gold and silver to that which carried on the
trade, than the prime cost of the whole amounted to. One of the

in favour of France, it would by no means follow that such a trade
would be disadvantageous to England, or that the general balance

most important branches of the Dutch trade at present, consists
in the carriage of French goods to other European countries. Some

of its whole trade would thereby be turned more against it. If the
wines of France are better and cheaper than those of Portugal, or

part even of the French wine drank in Great Britain, is clandestinely imported from Holland and Zealand. If there was either a

its linens than those of Germany, it would be more advantageous
for Great Britain to purchase both the wine and the foreign linen

free trade between France and England, or if French goods could
be imported upon paying only the same duties as those of other

which it had occasion for of France, than of Portugal and Germany. Though the value of the annual importations from France

European nations, to be drawn back upon exportation, England
might have some share of a trade which is found so advantageous

would thereby be greatly augmented, the value of the whole annual importations would be diminished, in proportion as the

to Holland.
Thirdly, and lastly, There is no certain criterion by which we

French goods of the same quality were cheaper than those of the

can determine on which side what is called the balance between

379

The Wealth of Nations
any two countries lies, or which of them exports to the greatest
value. National prejudice and animosity, prompted always by the

may compensate one another. But when one of them imports from
the other to a greater value than it exports to that other, the former

private interest of particular traders, are the principles which generally direct our judgment upon all questions concerning it. There are

necessarily becomes indebted to the latter in a greater sum than
the latter becomes indebted to it: the debts and credits of each do

two criterions, however, which have frequently been appealed to
upon such occasions, the custom-house books and the course of

not compensate one another, and money must be sent out from
that place of which the debts overbalance the credits. The ordi-

exchange. The custom-house books, I think, it is now generally acknowledged, are a very uncertain criterion, on account of the inac-

nary course of exchange, therefore, being an indication of the ordinary state of debt and credit between two places, must likewise

curacy of the valuation at which the greater part of goods are rated
in them. The course of exchange is, perhaps, almost equally so.

be an indication of the ordinary course of their exports and imports, as these necessarily regulate that state.

When the exchange between two places, such as London and
Paris, is at par, it is said to be a sign that the debts due from Lon-

But though the ordinary course of exchange shall be allowed to
be a sufficient indication of the ordinary state of debt and credit

don to Paris are compensated by those due from Paris to London.
On the contrary, when a premium is paid at London for a bill

between any two places, it would not from thence follow, that the
balance of trade was in favour of that place which had the ordi-

upon Paris, it is said to be a sign that the debts due from London
to Paris are not compensated by those due from Paris to London,

nary state of debt and credit in its favour. The ordinary state of
debt and credit between any two places is not always entirely regu-

but that a balance in money must be sent out from the latter place;
for the risk, trouble, and expense, of exporting which, the pre-

lated by the ordinary course of their dealings with one another,
but is often influenced by that of the dealings of either with many

mium is both demanded and given. But the ordinary state of debt
and credit between those two cities must necessarily be regulated,

other places. If it is usual, for example, for the merchants of England to pay for the goods which they buy of Hamburg, Dantzic,

it is said, by the ordinary course of their dealings with one another. When neither of them imports from from other to a greater

Riga, etc. by bills upon Holland, the ordinary state of debt and
credit between England and Holland will not be regulated en-

amount than it exports to that other, the debts and credits of each

tirely by the ordinary course of the dealings of those two countries

380

Adam Smith
with one another, but will be influenced by that of the dealings in
England with those other places. England may be obliged to send

supposed to get a premium, and exchange is said to be against
France, and in favour of England.

out every year money to Holland, though its annual exports to
that country may exceed very much the annual value of its im-

But, first, We cannot always judge of the value of the current
money of different countries by the standard of their respective

ports from thence, and though what is called the balance of trade
may be very much in favour of England.

mints. In some it is more, in others it is less worn, clipt, and otherwise degenerated from that standard. But the value of the cur-

In the way, besides, in which the par of exchange has hitherto
been computed, the ordinary course of exchange can afford no

rent coin of every country, compared with that of any other country, is in proportion, not to the quantity of pure silver which it

sufficient indication that the ordinary state of debt and credit is in
favour of that country which seems to have, or which is supposed

ought to contain, but to that which it actually does contain. Before the reformation of the silver coin in King William’s time,

to have, the ordinary course of exchange in its favour; or, in other
words, the real exchange may be, and in fact often is, so very dif-

exchange between England and Holland, computed in the usual
manner, according to the standard of their respective mints, was

ferent from the computed one, that, from the course of the latter,
no certain conclusion can, upon many occasions, be drawn con-

five-and twenty per cent. against England. But the value of the
current coin of England, as we learn from Mr Lowndes, was at

cerning that of the former.
When for a sum or money paid in England, containing, accord-

that time rather more than five-and-twenty per cent. below its
standard value. The real exchange, therefore, may even at that time

ing to the standard of the English mint, a certain number of ounces
of pure silver, you receive a bill for a sum of money to be paid in

have been in favour of England, notwithstanding the computed
exchange was so much against it; a smaller number or ounces of

France, containing, according to the standard of the French mint,
an equal number of ounces of pure silver, exchange is said to be at

pure silver, actually paid in England, may have purchased a bill
for a greater number of ounces of pure silver to be paid in Hol-

par between England and France. When you pay more, you are
supposed to give a premium, and exchange is said to be against

land, and the man who was supposed to give, may in reality have
got the premium. The French coin was, before the late reforma-

England, and in favour of France. When you pay less, you are

tion of the English gold coin, much less wore than the English,

381

The Wealth of Nations
and was perhaps two or three per cent. nearer its standard. If the
computed exchange with France, therefore, was not more than two

of their respective mints, a sum of English money could not well
purchase a sum of French money containing an equal number of

or three per cent. against England, the real exchange might have
been in its favour. Since the reformation of the gold coin, the ex-

ounces of pure silver, nor, consequently, a bill upon France for such
a sum. If, for such a bill, no more additional money was paid than

change has been constantly in favour of England, and against France.
Secondly, In some countries the expense of coinage is defrayed

what was sufficient to compensate the expense of the French coinage, the real exchange might be at par between the two countries;

by the government; in others, it is defrayed by the private people,
who carry their bullion to the mint, and the government even

their debts and credits might mutually compensate one another,
while the computed exchange was considerably in favour of France.

derives some revenue from the coinage. In England it is defrayed
by the government; and if you carry a pound weight of standard

If less than this was paid, the real exchange might be in favour of
England, while the computed was in favour of France.

silver to the mint, you get back sixty-two shillings, containing a
pound weight of the like standard silver. In France a duty of eight

Thirdly, and lastly, In some places, as at Amsterdam, Hamburg,
Venice, etc. foreign bills of exchange are paid in what they call

per cent. is deducted for the coinage, which not only defrays the
expense of it, but affords a small revenue to the government. In

bank money; while in others, as at London, Lisbon, Antwerp,
Leghorn, etc. they are paid in the common currency of the coun-

England, as the coinage costs nothing, the current coin can never
be much more valuable than the quantity of bullion which it ac-

try. What is called bank money, is always of more value than the
same nominal sum of common currency. A thousand guilders in

tually contains. In France, the workmanship, as you pay for it,
adds to the value, in the same manner as to that of wrought plate.

the bank of Amsterdam, for example, are of more value than a
thousand guilders of Amsterdam currency. The difference between

A sum of French money, therefore, containing an equal weight of
pure silver, is more valuable than a sum of English money con-

them is called the agio of the bank, which at Amsterdam is generally about five per cent. Supposing the current money of the two

taining an equal weight of pure silver, and must require more bullion, or other commodities, to purchase it. Though the current

countries equally near to the standard of their respective mints,
and that the one pays foreign bills in this common currency, while

coin of the two countries, therefore, were equally near the standards

the other pays them in bank money, it is evident that the com-

382

Adam Smith
puted exchange may be in favour of that which pays in bank money,
though the real exchange should be in favour of that which pays

standard value, the state, by a reformation of its coin, can effectually re-establish its currency. But the currency of a small state,

in current money; for the same reason that the computed exchange
may be in favour of that which pays in better money, or in money

such as Genoa or Hamburg, can seldom consist altogether in its
own coin, but must be made up, in a great measure, of the coins

nearer to its own standard, though the real exchange should be in
favour of that which pays in worse. The computed exchange, be-

of all the neighbouring states with which its inhabitants have a
continual intercourse. Such a state, therefore, by reforming its coin,

fore the late reformation of the gold coin, was generally against
London with Amsterdam, Hamburg, Venice, and, I believe, with

will not always be able to reform its currency. If foreign bills of
exchange are paid in this currency, the uncertain value of any sum,

all other places which pay in what is called bank money. It will by
no means follow, however, that the real exchange was against it.

of what is in its own nature so uncertain, must render the exchange always very much against such a state, its currency being

Since the reformation of the gold coin, it has been in favour of
London, even with those places. The computed exchange has gen-

in all foreign states necessarily valued even below what it is worth.
In order to remedy the inconvenience to which this disadvanta-

erally been in favour of London with Lisbon, Antwerp, Leghorn,
and, if you except France, I believe with most other parts of Eu-

geous exchange must have subjected their merchants, such small
states, when they began to attend to the interest of trade, have

rope that pay in common currency; and it is not improbable that
the real exchange was so too.

frequently enacted that foreign bills of exchange of a certain value
should be paid, not in common currency, but by an order upon,

Digression concerning Banks of Deposit, particularly concerning that of Amsterdam.

or by a transfer in the books of a certain bank, established upon
the credit, and under the protection of the state, this bank being
always obliged to pay, in good and true money, exactly according
to the standard of the state. The banks of Venice, Genoa,

The currency of a great state, such as France or England, generally
consists almost entirely of its own coin. Should this currency, there-

Amsterdam, Hamburg, and Nuremberg, seem to have been all
originally established with this view, though some of them may

fore, be at any time worn, clipt, or otherwise degraded below its

have afterwards been made subservient to other purposes. The

383

The Wealth of Nations
money of such banks, being better than the common currency of
the country, necessarily bore an agio, which was greater or smaller,

pense of coinage and the other necessary expense of management.
For the value which remained after this small deduction was made,

according as the currency was supposed to be more or less degraded below the standard of the state. The agio of the bank of

it gave a credit in its books. This credit was called bank money,
which, as it represented money exactly according to the standard of

Hamburg, for example, which is said to be commonly about fourteen per cent. is the supposed difference between the good stan-

the mint, was always of the same real value, and intrinsically worth
more than current money. It was at the same time enacted, that all

dard money of the state, and the clipt, worn, and diminished currency, poured into it from all the neighbouring states.

bills drawn upon or negotiated at Amsterdam, of the value of 600
guilders and upwards, should be paid in bank money, which at once

Before 1609, the great quantity of clipt and worn foreign coin
which the extensive trade of Amsterdam brought from all parts of

took away all uncertainty in the value of those bills. Every merchant, in consequence of this regulation, was obliged to keep an

Europe, reduced the value of its currency about nine per cent.
below that of good money fresh from the mint. Such money no

account with the bank, in order to pay his foreign bills of exchange,
which necessarily occasioned a certain demand for bank money.

sooner appeared, than it was melted down or carried away, as it
always is in such circumstances. The merchants, with plenty of

Bank money, over and above both its intrinsic superiority to
currency, and the additional value which this demand necessarily

currency, could not always find a sufficient quantity of good money
to pay their bills of exchange; and the value of those bills, in spite

gives it, has likewise some other advantages, It is secure from fire,
robbery, and other accidents; the city of Amsterdam is bound for

of several regulations which were made to prevent it, became in a
great measure uncertain.

it; it can be paid away by a simple transfer, without the trouble of
counting, or the risk of transporting it from one place to another.

In order to remedy these inconveniencies, a bank was established in 1609, under the guarantee of the city. This bank received

In consequence of those different advantages, it seems from the
beginning to have borne an agio; and it is generally believed that

both foreign coin, and the light and worn coin of the country, at
its real intrinsic value in the good standard money of the country,

all the money originally deposited in the bank, was allowed to
remain there, nobody caring to demand payment of a debt which

deducting only so much as was necessary for defraying the ex-

he could sell for a premium in the market. By demanding pay-

384

Adam Smith
ment of the bank, the owner of a bank credit would lose this premium. As a shilling fresh from the mint will buy no more goods

books, upon deposits of gold and silver bullion. This credit is generally about five per cent. below the mint price of such bullion.

in the market than one of our common worn shillings, so the
good and true money which might be brought from the coffers of

The bank grants at the same time what is called a recipice or receipt, entitling the person who makes the deposit, or the bearer, to

the bank into those of a private person, being mixed and confounded with the common currency of the country, would be of

take out the bullion again at any time within six months, upon
transferring to the bank a quantity of bank money equal to that

no more value than that currency, from which it could no longer
be readily distinguished. While it remained in the coffers of the

for which credit had been given in its books when the deposit was
made, and upon paying one-fourth per cent. for the keeping, if

bank, its superiority was known and ascertained. When it had
come into those of a private person, its superiority could not well

the deposit was in silver; and one-half per cent. if it was in gold; but
at the same time declaring, that in default of such payment, and

be ascertained without more trouble than perhaps the difference
was worth. By being brought from the coffers of the bank, be-

upon the expiration of this term, the deposit should belong to the
bank, at the price at which it had been received, or for which credit

sides, it lost all the other advantages of bank money; its security,
its easy and safe transferability, its use in paying foreign bills of

had been given in the transfer books. What is thus paid for the
keeping of the deposit may be considered as a sort of warehouse

exchange. Over and above all this, it could not be brought from
those coffers, as will appear by and by, without previously paying

rent; and why this warehouse rent should be so much dearer for
gold than for silver, several different reasons have been assigned.

for the keeping.
Those deposits of coin, or those deposits which the bank was

The fineness of gold, it has been said, is more difficult to be ascertained than that of silver. Frauds are more easily practised, and occa-

bound to restore in coin, constituted the original capital of the
bank, or the whole value of what was represented by what is called

sion a greater loss in the most precious metal. Silver, besides, being
the standard metal, the state, it has been said, wishes to encourage

bank money. At present they are supposed to constitute but a very
small part of it. In order to facilitate the trade in bullion, the bank

more the making of deposits of silver than those of gold.
Deposits of bullion are most commonly made when the price is

has been for these many years in the practice of giving credit in its

somewhat lower than ordinary, and they are taken out again when

385

The Wealth of Nations
it happens to rise. In Holland the market price of bullion is generally above the mint price, for the same reason that it was so in

Bar silver, containing 11-12ths fine silver, 21 Guilders / mark,
and in this proportion down to 1-4th fine, on which 5 guilders

England before the late reformation of the gold coin. The difference is said to be commonly from about six to sixteen stivers upon

are given. Fine bars, ................. 28 Guilders / mark.

the mark, or eight ounces of silver, of eleven parts of fine and one
part alloy. The bank price, or the credit which the bank gives for

GOLD
Portugal coin ............... 310 Guilders / mark

the deposits of such silver (when made in foreign coin, of which
the fineness is well known and ascertained, such as Mexico dol-

Guineas ....................... 310
Louis d’ors, new .......... 310

lars), is twenty-two guilders the mark: the mint price is about
twenty-three guilders, and the market price is from twenty-three

Ditto
old .............. 300
New ducats ................... 4 19 8 per ducat

guilders six, to twenty-three guilders sixteen stivers, or from two
to three per cent. above the mint price.

Bar or ingot gold is received in proportion to its fineness, com-

The following are the prices at which the bank of Amsterdam at
present {September 1775} receives bullion and coin of different

pared with the above foreign gold coin. Upon fine bars the bank
gives 340 per mark. In general, however, something more is given

kinds:

upon coin of a known fineness, than upon gold and silver bars, of
which the fineness cannot be ascertained but by a process of melt-

SILVER
Mexico dollars ....................... 22 Guilders / mark

ing and assaying.
The proportions between the bank price, the mint price, and

French crowns ....................... 22
English silver coin ................... 22

the market price of gold bullion, are nearly the same. A person
can generally sell his receipt for the difference between the mint

Mexico dollars, new coin ........ 21 10
Ducatoons ............................... 3 0

price of bullion and the market price. A receipt for bullion is almost always worth something, and it very seldom happens, there-

Rix-dollars ............................... 2 8

fore, that anybody suffers his receipts to expire, or allows his bul-

386

Adam Smith
lion to fall to the bank at the price at which it had been received,
either by not taking it out before the end of the six months, or by

money of his own, he must purchase it of those who have it. The
owner of bank money cannot draw out bullion, without produc-

neglecting to pay one fourth or one half per cent. in order to
obtain a new receipt for another six months. This, however, though

ing to the bank receipts for the quantity which he wants. If he has
none of his own, he must buy them of those who have them. The

it happens seldom, is said to happen sometimes, and more frequently with regard to gold than with regard to silver, on account

holder of a receipt, when he purchases bank money, purchases the
power of taking out a quantity of bullion, of which the mint price

of the higher warehouse rent which is paid for the keeping of the
more precious metal.

is five per cent. above the bank price. The agio of five per cent.
therefore, which he commonly pays for it, is paid, not for an imagi-

The person who, by making a deposit of bullion, obtains both a
bank credit and a receipt, pays his bills of exchange as they be-

nary, but for a real value. The owner of bank money, when he
purchases a receipt, purchases the power of taking out a quantity

come due, with his bank credit; and either sells or keeps his receipt, according as he judges that the price of bullion is likely to

of bullion, of which the market price is commonly from two to
three per cent. above the mint price. The price which he pays for

rise or to fall. The receipt and the bank credit seldom keep long
together, and there is no occasion that they should. The person

it, therefore, is paid likewise for a real value. The price of the receipt, and the price of the bank money, compound or make up

who has a receipt, and who wants to take out bullion, finds always
plenty of bank credits, or bank money, to buy at the ordinary

between them the full value or price of the bullion.
Upon deposits of the coin current in the country, the bank grant

price, and the person who has bank money, and wants to take out
bullion, finds receipts always in equal abundance.

receipts likewise, as well as bank credits; but those receipts are
frequently of no value and will bring no price in the market. Upon

The owners of bank credits, and the holders of receipts, constitute two different sorts of creditors against the bank. The holder

ducatoons, for example, which in the currency pass for three guilders three stivers each, the bank gives a credit of three guilders

of a receipt cannot draw out the bullion for which it is granted,
without re-assigning to the bank a sum of bank money equal to

only, or five per cent. below their current value. It grants a receipt
likewise, entitling the bearer to take out the number of ducatoons

the price at which the bullion had been received. If he has no bank

deposited at any time within six months, upon paying one fourth

387

The Wealth of Nations
per cent. for the keeping. This receipt will frequently bring no
price in the market. Three guilders, bank money, generally sell in

could be done without loss. But whatever may be the amount of
this sum, the proportion which it bears to the whole mass of bank

the market for three guilders three stivers, the full value of the
ducatoons, if they were taken out of the bank; and before they can

money is supposed to be very small. The bank of Amsterdam has,
for these many years past, been the great warehouse of Europe for

be taken out, one-fourth per cent. must be paid for the keeping,
which would be mere loss to the holder of the receipt. If the agio

bullion, for which the receipts are very seldom allowed to expire,
or, as they express it, to fall to the bank. The far greater part of the

of the bank, however, should at any time fall to three per cent.
such receipts might bring some price in the market, and might sell

bank money, or of the credits upon the books of the bank, is supposed to have been created, for these many years past, by such

for one and three-fourths per cent. But the agio of the bank being
now generally about five per cent. such receipts are frequently al-

deposits, which the dealers in bullion are continually both making and withdrawing.

lowed to expire, or, as they express it, to fall to the bank. The receipts which are given for deposits of gold ducats fall to it yet more

No demand can be made upon the bank, but by means of a
recipice or receipt. The smaller mass of bank money, for which

frequently, because a higher warehouse rent, or one half per cent.
must be paid for the keeping of them, before they can be taken out

the receipts are expired, is mixed and confounded with the much
greater mass for which they are still in force; so that, though there

again. The five per cent. which the bank gains, when deposits either
of coin or bullion are allowed to fall to it, maybe considered as the

may be a considerable sum of bank money, for which there are no
receipts, there is no specific sum or portion of it which may not at

warehouse rent for the perpetual keeping of such deposits.
The sum of bank money, for which the receipts are expired,

any time be demanded by one. The bank cannot be debtor to two
persons for the same thing; and the owner of bank money who

must be very considerable. It must comprehend the whole original capital of the bank, which, it is generally supposed, has been

has no receipt, cannot demand payment of the bank till he buys
one. In ordinary and quiet times, he can find no difficulty in get-

allowed to remain there from the time it was first deposited, nobody caring either to renew his receipt, or to take out his deposit,

ting one to buy at the market price, which generally corresponds
with the price at which he can sell the coin or bullion it entitles

as, for the reasons already assigned, neither the one nor the other

him to take out of the bank.

388

Adam Smith
It might be otherwise during a public calamity; an invasion, for
example, such as that of the French in 1672. The owners of bank

of receipts to depress the agio, in order either to buy bank money
(and consequently the bullion which their receipts would then

money being then all eager to draw it out of the bank, in order to
have it in their own keeping, the demand for receipts might raise

enable them to take out of the bank ) so much cheaper, or to sell
their receipts to those who have bank money, and who want to

their price to an exorbitant height. The holders of them might
form extravagant expectations, and, instead of two or three per

take out bullion, so much dearer; the price of a receipt being generally equal to the difference between the market price of bank

cent. demand half the bank money for which credit had been
given upon the deposits that the receipts had respectively been

money and that of the coin or bullion for which the receipt had
been granted. It is the interest of the owners of bank money, on

granted for. The enemy, informed of the constitution of the bank,
might even buy them up, in order to prevent the carrying away of

the contrary, to raise the agio, in order either to sell their bank
money so much dearer, or to buy a receipt so much cheaper. To

the treasure. In such emergencies, the bank, it is supposed, would
break through its ordinary rule of making payment only to the

prevent the stock-jobbing tricks which those opposite interests
might sometimes occasion, the bank has of late years come to the

holders of receipts. The holders of receipts, who had no bank
money, must have received within two or three per cent. of the

resolution, to sell at all times bank money for currency at five per
cent. agio, and to buy it in again at four per cent. agio. In conse-

value of the deposit for which their respective receipts had been
granted. The bank, therefore, it is said, would in this case make no

quence of this resolution, the agio can never either rise above five,
or sink below four per cent.; and the proportion between the mar-

scruple of paying, either with money or bullion, the full value of
what the owners of bank money, who could get no receipts, were

ket price of bank and that of current money is kept at all times
very near the proportion between their intrinsic values. Before

credited for in its books; paying, at the same time, two or three
per cent. to such holders of receipts as had no bank money, that

this resolution was taken, the market price of bank money used
sometimes to rise so high as nine per cent. agio, and sometimes to

being the whole value which, in this state of things, could justly
be supposed due to them.

sink so low as par, according as opposite interests happened to
influence the market.

Even in ordinary and quiet times, it is the interest of the holders

The bank of Amsterdam professes to lend out no part of what is

389

The Wealth of Nations
deposited with it, but for every guilder for which it gives credit in
its books, to keep in its repositories the value of a guilder either in

of Amsterdam, the prevailing party has at no time accused their
predecessors of infidelity in the administration of the bank. No

money or bullion. That it keeps in its repositories all the money or
bullion for which there are receipts in force for which it is at all

accusation could have affected more deeply the reputation and
fortune of the disgraced party; and if such an accusation could

times liable to be called upon, and which in reality is continually
going from it, and returning to it again, cannot well be doubted.

have been supported, we may be assured that it would have been
brought. In 1672, when the French king was at Utrecht, the bank

But whether it does so likewise with regard to that part of its capital for which the receipts are long ago expired, for which, in ordi-

of Amsterdam paid so readily, as left no doubt of the fidelity with
which it had observed its engagements. Some of the pieces which

nary and quiet times, it cannot be called upon, and which, in
reality, is very likely to remain with it for ever, or as long as the

were then brought from its repositories, appeared to have been
scorched with the fire which happened in the town-house soon

states of the United Provinces subsist, may perhaps appear more
uncertain. At Amsterdam, however, no point of faith is better es-

after the bank was established. Those pieces, therefore, must have
lain there from that time.

tablished than that, for every guilder circulated as bank money,
there is a correspondent guilder in gold or silver to be found in the

What may be the amount of the treasure in the bank, is a question which has long employed the speculations of the curious.

treasures of the bank. The city is guarantee that it should be so.
The bank is under the direction of the four reigning burgomasters

Nothing but conjecture can be offered concerning it. It is generally reckoned, that there are about 2000 people who keep accounts

who are changed every year. Each new set of burgomasters visits
the treasure, compares it with the books, receives it upon oath,

with the bank; and allowing them to have, one with another, the
value of £1500 sterling lying upon their respective accounts (a

and delivers it over, with the same awful solemnity to the set which
succeeds; and in that sober and religious country, oaths are not yet

very large allowance), the whole quantity of bank money, and consequently of treasure in the bank, will amount to about £3,000,000

disregarded. A rotation of this kind seems alone a sufficient security against any practices which cannot be avowed. Amidst all the

sterling, or, at eleven guilders the pound sterling, 33,000,000 of
guilders; a great sum, and sufficient to carry on a very extensive

revolutions which faction has ever occasioned in the government

circulation, but vastly below the extravagant ideas which some

390

Adam Smith
people have formed of this treasure.
The city of Amsterdam derives a considerable revenue from the

inconvenience of a disadvantageous exchange. The revenue which
has arisen from it was unforeseen, and may be considered as acci-

bank. Besides what may be called the warehouse rent above mentioned, each person, upon first opening an account with the bank,

dental. But it is now time to return from this long digression, into
which I have been insensibly led, in endeavouring to explain the

pays a fee of ten guilders; and for every new account, three guilder’s
three stivers; for every transfer, two stivers; and if the transfer is for

reasons why the exchange between the countries which pay in
what is called bank money, and those which pay in common cur-

less than 300 guilders, six stivers, in order to discourage the multiplicity of small transactions. The person who neglects to balance

rency, should generally appear to be in favour of the former, and
against the latter. The former pay in a species of money, of which

his account twice in the year, forfeits twenty-five guilders. The
person who orders a transfer for more than is upon his account, is

the intrinsic value is always the same, and exactly agreeable to the
standard of their respective mints; the latter is a species of money,

obliged to pay three per cent. for the sum overdrawn, and his
order is set aside into the bargain. The bank is supposed, too, to

of which the intrinsic value is continually varying, and is almost
always more or less below that standard.

make a considerable profit by the sale of the foreign coin or bullion which sometimes falls to it by the expiring of receipts, and
which is always kept till it can be sold with advantage. It makes a
profit, likewise, by selling bank money at five per cent. agio, and

PART II. — Of the Unreasonableness of those extraordinary
Restraints, upon other Principles.

buying it in at four. These different emoluments amount to a good
deal more than what is necessary for paying the salaries of officers,

In the foregoing part of this chapter, I have endeavoured to show,

and defraying the expense of management. What is paid for the
keeping of bullion upon receipts, is alone supposed to amount to

even upon the principles of the commercial system, how unnecessary it is to lay extraordinary restraints upon the importation of

a neat annual revenue of between 150,000 and 200,000 guilders.
Public utility, however, and not revenue, was the original object of

goods from those countries with which the balance of trade is
supposed to be disadvantageous.

this institution. Its object was to relieve the merchants from the

Nothing, however, can be more absurd than this whole doctrine

391

The Wealth of Nations
of the balance of trade, upon which, not only these restraints, but
almost all the other regulations of commerce, are founded. When

ing for the market this part of the surplus produce of the other,
and which had been distributed among, and given revenue and

two places trade with one another, this doctrine supposes that, if
the balance be even, neither of them either loses or gains; but if it

maintenance to, a certain number of its inhabitants. Some part of
the inhabitants of each, therefore, will directly derive their rev-

leans in any degree to one side, that one of them loses, and the
other gains, in proportion to its declension from the exact equi-

enue and maintenance from the other. As the commodities exchanged, too, are supposed to be of equal value, so the two capi-

librium. Both suppositions are false. A trade, which is forced by
means of bounties and monopolies, may be, and commonly is,

tals employed in the trade will, upon most occasions, be equal, or
very nearly equal; and both being employed in raising the native

disadvantageous to the country in whose favour it is meant to be
established, as I shall endeavour to show hereafter. But that trade

commodities of the two countries, the revenue and maintenance
which their distribution will afford to the inhabitants of each will

which, without force or constraint, is naturally and regularly carried on between any two places, is always advantageous, though

be equal, or very nearly equal. This revenue and maintenance,
thus mutually afforded, will be greater or smaller, in proportion

not always equally so, to both.
By advantage or gain, I understand, not the increase of the quan-

to the extent of their dealings. If these should annually amount to
£100,000, for example, or to £1,000,000, on each side, each of

tity of gold and silver, but that of the exchangeable value of the
annual produce of the land and labour of the country, or the in-

them will afford an annual revenue, in the one case, of £100,000,
and, in the other, of £1,000,000, to the inhabitants of the other.

crease of the annual revenue of its inhabitants.
If the balance be even, and if the trade between the two places

If their trade should be of such a nature, that one of them exported to the other nothing but native commodities, while the

consist altogether in the exchange of their native commodities,
they will, upon most occasions, not only both gain, but they will

returns of that other consisted altogether in foreign goods; the
balance, in this case, would still be supposed even, commodities

gain equally, or very nearly equally; each will, in this case, afford a
market for a part of the surplus produce of the other; each will

being paid for with commodities. They would, in this case too,
both gain, but they would not gain equally; and the inhabitants of

replace a capital which had been employed in raising and prepar-

the country which exported nothing but native commodities,

392

Adam Smith
would derive the greatest revenue from the trade. If England, for
example, should import from France nothing but the native com-

direct, and of one employed in the round-about foreign trade of
consumption, have already been fully explained.

modities of that country, and not having such commodities of its
own as were in demand there, should annually repay them by

There is not, probably, between any two countries, a trade which
consists altogether in the exchange, either of native commodities

sending thither a large quantity of foreign goods, tobacco, we shall
suppose, and East India goods; this trade, though it would give

on both sides, or of native commodities on one side, and of foreign goods on the other. Almost all countries exchange with one

some revenue to the inhabitants of both countries, would give
more to those of France than to those of England. The whole

another, partly native and partly foreign goods That country, however, in whose cargoes there is the greatest proportion of native,

French capital annually employed in it would annually be distributed among the people of France; but that part of the English

and the least of foreign goods, will always be the principal gainer.
If it was not with tobacco and East India goods, but with gold

capital only, which was employed in producing the English commodities with which those foreign goods were purchased, would

and silver, that England paid for the commodities annually imported from France, the balance, in this case, would be supposed

be annually distributed among the people of England. The greater
part of it would replace the capitals which had been employed in

uneven, commodities not being paid for with commodities, but
with gold and silver. The trade, however, would in this case, as in

Virginia, Indostan, and China, and which had given revenue and
maintenance to the inhabitants of those distant countries. If the

the foregoing, give some revenue to the inhabitants of both countries, but more to those of France than to those of England. It

capitals were equal, or nearly equal, therefore, this employment of
the French capital would augment much more the revenue of the

would give some revenue to those of England. The capital which
had been employed in producing the English goods that purchased

people of France, than that of the English capital would the revenue of the people of England. France would, in this case, carry

this gold and silver, the capital which had been distributed among,
and given revenue to, certain inhabitants of England, would thereby

on a direct foreign trade of consumption with England; whereas
England would carry on a round-about trade of the same kind

be replaced, and enabled to continue that employment. The whole
capital of England would no more be diminished by this exporta-

with France. The different effects of a capital employed in the

tion of gold and silver, than by the exportation of an equal value

393

The Wealth of Nations
of any other goods. On the contrary, it would, in most cases, be
augmented. No goods are sent abroad but those for which the

advantageous for England that it could purchase the wines of France
with its own hardware and broad cloth, than with either the to-

demand is supposed to be greater abroad than at home, and of
which the returns, consequently, it is expected, will be of more

bacco of Virginia, or the gold and silver of Brazil and Peru. A
direct foreign trade of consumption is always more advantageous

value at home than the commodities exported. If the tobacco which
in England is worth only £100,000, when sent to France, will

than a round-about one. But a round-about foreign trade of consumption, which is carried on with gold and silver, does not seem

purchase wine which is in England worth £110,000, the exchange
will augment the capital of England by £10,000. If £100,000 of

to be less advantageous than any other equally round-about one.
Neither is a country which has no mines, more likely to be ex-

English gold, in the same manner, purchase French wine, which
in England is worth £110,000, this exchange will equally aug-

hausted of gold and silver by this annual exportation of those metals, than one which does not grow tobacco by the like annual

ment the capital of England by £10,000. As a merchant, who has
£110,000 worth of wine in his cellar, is a richer man than he who

exportation of that plant. As a country which has wherewithal to
buy tobacco will never be long in want of it, so neither will one be

has only £100,000 worth of tobacco in his warehouse, so is he
likewise a richer man than he who has only £100,000 worth of

long in want of gold and silver which has wherewithal to purchase
those metals.

gold in his coffers. He can put into motion a greater quantity of
industry, and give revenue, maintenance, and employment, to a

It is a losing trade, it is said, which a workman carries on with
the alehouse; and the trade which a manufacturing nation would

greater number of people, than either of the other two. But the
capital of the country is equal to the capital of all its different

naturally carry on with a wine country, may be considered as a
trade of the same nature. I answer, that the trade with the alehouse

inhabitants; and the quantity of industry which can be annually
maintained in it is equal to what all those different capitals can

is not necessarily a losing trade. In its own nature it is just as advantageous as any other, though, perhaps, somewhat more liable

maintain. Both the capital of the country, therefore, and the quantity of industry which can be annually maintained in it, must gen-

to be abused. The employment of a brewer, and even that of a
retailer of fermented liquors, are as necessary division’s of labour

erally be augmented by this exchange. It would, indeed, be more

as any other. It will generally be more advantageous for a work-

394

Adam Smith
man to buy of the brewer the quantity he has occasion for, than to
brew it himself; and if he is a poor workman, it will generally be

countries which, either from excessive heat or cold, produce no
grapes, and where wine consequently is dear and a rarity, drunk-

more advantageous for him to buy it by little and little of the
retailer, than a large quantity of the brewer. He may no doubt buy

enness is a common vice, as among the northern nations, and all
those who live between the tropics, the negroes, for example on

too much of either, as he may of any other dealers in his
neighbourhood; of the butcher, if he is a glutton; or of the draper,

the coast of Guinea. When a French regiment comes from some
of the northern provinces of France, where wine is somewhat dear,

if he affects to be a beau among his companions. It is advantageous to the great body of workmen, notwithstanding, that all

to be quartered in the southern, where it is very cheap, the soldiers, I have frequently heard it observed, are at first debauched by

these trades should be free, though this freedom may be abused in
all of them, and is more likely to be so, perhaps, in some than in

the cheapness and novelty of good wine; but after a few months
residence, the greater part of them become as sober as the rest of

others. Though individuals, besides, may sometimes ruin their
fortunes by an excessive consumption of fermented liquors, there

the inhabitants. Were the duties upon foreign wines, and the excises upon malt, beer, and ale, to be taken away all at once, it

seems to be no risk that a nation should do so. Though in every
country there are many people who spend upon such liquors more

might, in the same manner, occasion in Great Britain a pretty
general and temporary drunkenness among the middling and in-

than they can afford, there are always many more who spend less.
It deserves to be remarked, too, that if we consult experience, the

ferior ranks of people, which would probably be soon followed by
a permanent and almost universal sobriety. At present, drunken-

cheapness of wine seems to be a cause, not of drunkenness, but of
sobriety. The inhabitants of the wine countries are in general the

ness is by no means the vice of people of fashion, or of those who
can easily afford the most expensive liquors. A gentleman drunk

soberest people of Europe; witness the Spaniards, the Italians, and
the inhabitants of the southern provinces of France. People are

with ale has scarce ever been seen among us. The restraints upon
the wine trade in Great Britain, besides, do not so much seem

seldom guilty of excess in what is their daily fare. Nobody affects
the character of liberality and good fellowship, by being profuse

calculated to hinder the people from going, if I may say so, to the
alehouse, as from going where they can buy the best and cheapest

of a liquor which is as cheap as small beer. On the contrary, in the

liquor. They favour the wine trade of Portugal, and discourage

395

The Wealth of Nations
that of France. The Portuguese, it is said, indeed, are better customers for our manufactures than the French, and should therefore be

neither are, nor ought to be, the rulers of mankind, though it
cannot, perhaps, be corrected, may very easily be prevented from

encouraged in preference to them. As they give us their custom, it is
pretended we should give them ours. The sneaking arts of under-

disturbing the tranquillity of anybody but themselves.
That it was the spirit of monopoly which originally both in-

ling tradesmen are thus erected into political maxims for the conduct of a great empire; for it is the most underling tradesmen only

vented and propagated this doctrine, cannot be doubted and they
who first taught it, were by no means such fools as they who be-

who make it a rule to employ chiefly their own customers. A great
trader purchases his goods always where they are cheapest and best,

lieved it. In every country it always is, and must be, the interest of
the great body of the people, to buy whatever they want of those

without regard to any little interest of this kind.
By such maxims as these, however, nations have been taught

who sell it cheapest. The proposition is so very manifest, that it
seems ridiculous to take any pains to prove it; nor could it ever

that their interest consisted in beggaring all their neighbours. Each
nation has been made to look with an invidious eye upon the

have been called in question, had not the interested sophistry of
merchants and manufacturers confounded the common sense of

prosperity of all the nations with which it trades, and to consider
their gain as its own loss. Commerce, which ought naturally to be,

mankind. Their interest is, in this respect, directly opposite to
that of the great body of the people. As it is the interest of the

among nations as among individuals, a bond of union and friendship, has become the most fertile source of discord and animosity.

freemen of a corporation to hinder the rest of the inhabitants from
employing any workmen but themselves; so it is the interest of the

The capricious ambition of kings and ministers has not, during
the present and the preceding century, been more fatal to the re-

merchants and manufacturers of every country to secure to themselves the monopoly of the home market. Hence, in Great Britain,

pose of Europe, than the impertinent jealousy of merchants and
manufacturers. The violence and injustice of the rulers of man-

and in most other European countries, the extraordinary duties
upon almost all goods imported by alien merchants. Hence the

kind is an ancient evil, for which, I am afraid, the nature of human affairs can scarce admit of a remedy: but the mean rapacity,

high duties and prohibitions upon all those foreign manufactures
which can come into competition with our own. Hence, too, the

the monopolizing spirit, of merchants and manufacturers, who

extraordinary restraints upon the importation of almost all sorts

396

Adam Smith
of goods from those countries with which the balance of trade is
supposed to be disadvantageous; that is, from those against whom

to make a fortune, never think of retiring to the remote and poor
provinces of the country, but resort either to the capital, or to

national animosity happens ta be most violently inflamed.
The wealth of neighbouring nations, however, though danger-

some of the great commercial towns. They know, that where little
wealth circulates, there is little to be got; but that where a great

ous in war and politics, is certainly advantageous in trade. In a
state of hostility, it may enable our enemies to maintain fleets and

deal is in motion, some share of it may fall to them. The same
maxim which would in this manner direct the common sense of

armies superior to our own; but in a state of peace and commerce
it must likewise enable them to exchange with us to a greater value,

one, or ten, or twenty individuals, should regulate the judgment
of one, or ten, or twenty millions, and should make a whole na-

and to afford a better market, either for the immediate produce of
our own industry, or for whatever is purchased with that produce.

tion regard the riches of its neighbours, as a probable cause and
occasion for itself to acquire riches. A nation that would enrich

As a rich man is likely to be a better customer to the industrious
people in his neighbourhood, than a poor, so is likewise a rich

itself by foreign trade, is certainly most likely to do so, when its
neighbours are all rich, industrious and commercial nations. A

nation. A rich man, indeed, who is himself a manufacturer, is a
very dangerous neighbour to all those who deal in the same way.

great nation, surrounded on all sides by wandering savages and
poor barbarians, might, no doubt, acquire riches by the cultiva-

All the rest of the neighbourhood, however, by far the greatest
number, profit by the good market which his expense affords them.

tion of its own lands, and by its own interior commerce, but not
by foreign trade. It seems to have been in this manner that the

They even profit by his underselling the poorer workmen who
deal in the same way with him. The manufacturers of a rich na-

ancient Egyptians and the modern Chinese acquired their great
wealth. The ancient Egyptians, it is said, neglected foreign com-

tion, in the same manner, may no doubt be very dangerous rivals
to those of their neighbours. This very competition, however, is

merce, and the modern Chinese, it is known, hold it in the utmost contempt, and scarce deign to afford it the decent protec-

advantageous to the great body of the people, who profit greatly,
besides, by the good market which the great expense of such a

tion of the laws. The modern maxims of foreign commerce, by
aiming at the impoverishment of all our neighbours, so far as they

nation affords them in every other way. Private people, who want

are capable of producing their intended effect, tend to render that

397

The Wealth of Nations
very commerce insignificant and contemptible.
It is in consequence of these maxims, that the commerce be-

nies, in which the returns were seldom made in less than three
years, frequently not in less than four or five years. France, be-

tween France and England has, in both countries, been subjected
to so many discouragements and restraints. If those two coun-

sides, is supposed to contain 24,000,000 of inhabitants. Our North
American colonies were never supposed to contain more than

tries, however, were to consider their real interest, without either
mercantile jealousy or national animosity, the commerce of France

3,000,000; and France is a much richer country than North
America; though, on account of the more unequal distribution of

might be more advantageous to Great Britain than that of any
other country, and, for the same reason, that of Great Britain to

riches, there is much more poverty and beggary in the one country than in the other. France, therefore, could afford a market at

France. France is the nearest neighbour to Great Britain. In the
trade between the southern coast of England and the northern

least eight times more extensive, and, on account of the superior
frequency of the returns, four-and-twenty times more advanta-

and north-western coast of France, the returns might be expected,
in the same manner as in the inland trade, four, five, or six times

geous than that which our North American colonies ever afforded.
The trade of Great Britain would be just as advantageous to France,

in the year. The capital, therefore, employed in this trade could, in
each of the two countries, keep in motion four, five, or six times

and, in proportion to the wealth, population, and proximity of
the respective countries, would have the same superiority over that

the quantity of industry, and afford employment and subsistence
to four, five, or six times the number of people, which all equal

which France carries on with her own colonies. Such is the very
great difference between that trade which the wisdom of both

capital could do in the greater part of the other branches of foreign trade. Between the parts of France and Great Britain most

nations has thought proper to discourage, and that which it has
favoured the most.

remote from one another, the returns might be expected, at least,
once in the year; and even this trade would so far be at least equally

But the very same circumstances which would have rendered an
open and free commerce between the two countries so advanta-

advantageous, as the greater part of the other branches of our foreign European trade. It would be, at least, three times more ad-

geous to both, have occasioned the principal obstructions to that
commerce. Being neighbours, they are necessarily enemies, and

vantageous than the boasted trade with our North American colo-

the wealth and power of each becomes, upon that account, more

398

Adam Smith
formidable to the other; and what would increase the advantage
of national friendship, serves only to inflame the violence of na-

same respects, deserve the name of free ports, there is no country
which does so. Holland, perhaps, approaches the nearest to this

tional animosity. They are both rich and industrious nations; and
the merchants and manufacturers of each dread the competition

character of any, though still very remote from it; and Holland, it
is acknowledged, not only derives its whole wealth, but a great

of the skill and activity of those of the other. Mercantile jealousy is
excited, and both inflames, and is itself inflamed, by the violence

part of its necessary subsistence, from foreign trade.
There is another balance, indeed, which has already been ex-

of national animosity, and the traders of both countries have announced, with all the passionate confidence of interested false-

plained, very different from the balance of trade, and which, according as it happens to be either favourable or unfavourable, nec-

hood, the certain ruin of each, in consequence of that unfavourable
balance of trade, which, they pretend, would be the infallible ef-

essarily occasions the prosperity or decay of every nation. This is
the balance of the annual produce and consumption. If the ex-

fect of an unrestrained commerce with the other.
There is no commercial country in Europe, of which the ap-

changeable value of the annual produce, it has already been observed, exceeds that of the annual consumption, the capital of the

proaching ruin has not frequently been foretold by the pretended
doctors of this system, from all unfavourably balance of trade.

society must annually increase in proportion to this excess. The
society in this case lives within its revenue; and what is annually

After all the anxiety, however, which they have excited about this,
after all the vain attempts of almost all trading nations to turn that

saved out of its revenue, is naturally added to its capital, and employed so as to increase still further the annual produce. If the

balance in their own favour, and against their neighbours, it does
not appear that any one nation in Europe has been, in any respect,

exchangeable value of the annual produce, on the contrary, fall
short of the annual consumption, the capital of the society must

impoverished by this cause. Every town and country, on the contrary, in proportion as they have opened their ports to all nations,

annually decay in proportion to this deficiency. The expense of
the society, in this case, exceeds its revenue, and necessarily en-

instead of being ruined by this free trade, as the principles of the
commercial system would lead us to expect, have been enriched

croaches upon its capital. Its capital, therefore, must necessarily
decay, and, together with it, the exchangeable value of the annual

by it. Though there are in Europe indeed, a few towns which, in

produce of its industry.

399

The Wealth of Nations
This balance of produce and consumption is entirely different
from what is called the balance of trade. It might take place in a

CHAPTER IV

nation which had no foreign trade, but which was entirely separated from all the world. It may take place in the whole globe of

OF DRAWBACKS

the earth, of which the wealth, population, and improvement,
may be either gradually increasing or gradually decaying.

MERCHANTS AND MANUFACTURERS are not contented with the mo-

The balance of produce and consumption may be constantly in
favour of a nation, though what is called the balance of trade be
generally against it. A nation may import to a greater value than it
exports for half a century, perhaps, together; the gold and silver
which comes into it during all this time, may be all immediately
sent out of it; its circulating coin may gradually decay, different
sorts of paper money being substituted in its place, and even the
debts, too, which it contracts in the principal nations with whom
it deals, may be gradually increasing; and yet its real wealth, the
exchangeable value of the annual produce of its lands and labour,
may, during the same period, have been increasing in a much greater
proportion. The state of our North American colonies, and of the
trade which they carried on with Great Britain, before the commencement of the present disturbances, {This paragraph was written in the year 1775.} may serve as a proof that this is by no means
an impossible supposition.

nopoly of the home market, but desire likewise the most extensive
foreign sale for their goods. Their country has no jurisdiction in
foreign nations, and therefore can seldom procure them any monopoly there. They are generally obliged, therefore, to content themselves with petitioning for certain encouragements to exportation.
Of these encouragements, what are called drawbacks seem to be
the most reasonable. To allow the merchant to draw back upon
exportation, either the whole, or a part of whatever excise or inland duty is imposed upon domestic industry, can never occasion
the exportation of a greater quantity of goods than what would
have been exported had no duty been imposed. Such encouragements do not tend to turn towards any particular employment a
greater share of the capital of the country, than what would go to
that employment of its own accord, but only to hinder the duty
from driving away any part of that share to other employments.
They tend not to overturn that balance which naturally establishes itself among all the various employments of the society, but
to hinder it from being overturned by the duty. They tend not to

400

Adam Smith
destroy, but to preserve, what it is in most cases advantageous to
preserve, the natural division and distribution of labour in the

Upon the exportation of some foreign goods, of which it was
expected that the importation would greatly exceed what was nec-

society.
The same thing may be said of the drawbacks upon the re-ex-

essary for the home consumption, the whole duties are drawn
back, without retaining even half the old subsidy. Before the re-

portation of foreign goods imported, which, in Great Britain, generally amount to by much the largest part of the duty upon im-

volt of our North American colonies, we had the monopoly of the
tobacco of Maryland and Virginia. We imported about ninety-six

portation. By the second of the rules, annexed to the act of parliament, which imposed what is now called the old subsidy, every

thousand hogsheads, and the home consumption was not supposed to exceed fourteen thousand. To facilitate the great exporta-

merchant, whether English or alien. was allowed to draw back
half that duty upon exportation; the English merchant, provided

tion which was necessary, in order to rid us of the rest, the whole
duties were drawn back, provided the exportation took place within

the exportation took place within twelve months; the alien, provided it took place within nine months. Wines, currants, and

three years.
We still have, though not altogether, yet very nearly, the mo-

wrought silks, were the only goods which did not fall within this
rule, having other and more advantageous allowances. The duties

nopoly of the sugars of our West Indian islands. If sugars are exported within a year, therefore, all the duties upon importation

imposed by this act of parliament were, at that time, the only
duties upon the importation of foreign goods. The term within

are drawn back; and if exported within three years, all the duties,
except half the old subsidy, which still continues to be retained

which this, and all other drawbacks could be claimed, was afterwards (by 7 Geo. I. chap. 21. sect. 10.) extended to three years.

upon the exportation of the greater part of goods. Though the
importation of sugar exceeds a good deal what is necessary for the

The duties which have been imposed since the old subsidy, are,
the greater part of them, wholly drawn back upon exportation.

home consumption, the excess is inconsiderable, in comparison
of what it used to be in tobacco.

This general rule, however, is liable to a great number of exceptions; and the doctrine of drawbacks has become a much less simple

Some goods, the particular objects of the jealousy of our own
manufacturers, are prohibited to be imported for home consump-

matter than it was at their first institution.

tion. They may, however, upon paying certain duties,be imported

401

The Wealth of Nations
and warehoused for exportation. But upon such exportation no
part of these duties is drawn back. Our manufacturers are unwill-

upon exportation. All those duties, however, except the additional
duty and impost 1692, being paid down in ready money upon

ing, it seems, that even this restricted importation should be encouraged, and are afraid lest some part of these goods should be

importation, the interest of so large a sum occasioned an expense,
which made it unreasonable to expect any profitable carrying trade

stolen out of the warehouse, and thus come into competition with
their own. It is under these regulations only that we can import

in this article. Only a part, therefore of the duty called the impost
on wine, and no part of the twenty-five pounds the ton upon

wrought silks, French cambrics and lawns, calicoes, painted,
printed, stained, or dyed, etc.

French wines, or of the duties imposed in 1745, in 1763, and in
1778, were allowed to be drawn back upon exportation. The two

We are unwilling even to be the carriers of French goods, and
choose rather to forego a profit to ourselves than to suffer those

imposts of five per cent. imposed in 1779 and 1781, upon all the
former duties of customs, being allowed to be wholly drawn back

whom we consider as our enemies to make any profit by our means.
Not only half the old subsidy, but the second twenty-five per cent.

upon the exportation of all other goods, were likewise allowed to
be drawn back upon that of wine. The last duty that has been

is retained upon the exportation of all French goods.
By the fourth of the rules annexed to the old subsidy, the draw-

particularly imposed upon wine, that of 1780, is allowed to be
wholly drawn back; an indulgence which, when so many heavy

back allowed upon the exportation of all wines amounted to a
great deal more than half the duties which were at that time paid

duties are retained, most probably could never occasion the exportation of a single ton of wine. These rules took place with re-

upon their importation; and it seems at that time to have been the
object of the legislature to give somewhat more than ordinary en-

gard to all places of lawful exportation, except the British colonies
in America.

couragement to the carrying trade in wine. Several of the other
duties, too which were imposed either at the same time or subse-

The 15th Charles II, chap. 7, called an act for the encouragement of trade, had given Great Britain the monopoly of supplying

quent to the old subsidy, what is called the additional duty, the
new subsidy, the one-third and two-thirds subsidies, the impost

the colonies with all the commodities of the growth or manufacture of Europe, and consequently with wines. In a country of so

1692, the tonnage on wine, were allowed to be wholly drawn back

extensive a coast as our North American and West Indian colo-

402

Adam Smith
nies, where our authority was always so very slender, and where
the inhabitants were allowed to carry out in their own ships their

to the commerce and consumption of which national prejudice
would allow no sort of encouragement. The period between the

non-enumerated commodities, at first to all parts of Europe, and
afterwards to all parts of Europe south of Cape Finisterre, it is not

granting of this indulgence and the revolt of our North American
colonies, was probably too short to admit of any considerable

very probable that this monopoly could ever be much respected;
and they probably at all times found means of bringing back some

change in the customs of those countries.
The same act which, in the drawbacks upon all wines, except

cargo from the countries to which they were allowed to carry out
one. They seem, however, to have found some difficulty in im-

French wines, thus favoured the colonies so much more than other
countries, in those upon the greater part of other commodities,

porting European wines from the places of their growth; and they
could not well import them from Great Britain, where they were

favoured them much less. Upon the exportation of the greater
part of commodities to other countries, half the old subsidy was

loaded with many heavy duties, of which a considerable part was
not drawn back upon exportation. Madeira wine, not being an

drawn back. But this law enacted, that no part of that duty should
be drawn back upon the exportation to the colonies of any com-

European commodity, could be imported directly into America
and the West Indies, countries which, in all their non-enumerated

modities of the growth or manufacture either of Europe or the
East Indies, except wines, white calicoes, and muslins.

commodities, enjoyed a free trade to the island of Madeira. These
circumstances had probably introduced that general taste for Ma-

Drawbacks were, perhaps, originally granted for the encouragement of the carrying trade, which, as the freight of the ship is

deira wine, which our officers found established in all our colonies at the commencement of the war which began in 1755, and

frequently paid by foreigners in money, was supposed to be peculiarly fitted for bringing gold and silver into the country. But though

which they brought back with them to the mother country, where
that wine had not been much in fashion before. Upon the conclu-

the carrying trade certainly deserves no peculiar encouragement,
though the motive of the institution was, perhaps, abundantly

sion of that war, in 1763 (by the 4th Geo. III, chap. 15, sect. 12),
all the duties except £3, 10s. were allowed to be drawn back upon

foolish, the institution itself seems reasonable enough. Such drawbacks cannot force into this trade a greater share of the capital of

the exportation to the colonies of all wines, except French wines,

the country than what would have gone to it of its own accord,

403

The Wealth of Nations
had there been no duties upon importation; they only prevent its
being excluded altogether by those duties. The carrying trade,

independent, not to those in which our merchants and manufacturers enjoy a monopoly. A drawback, for example, upon the ex-

though it deserves no preference, ought not to be precluded, but
to be left free, like all other trades. It is a necessary resource to

portation of European goods to our American colonies, will not
always occasion a greater exportation than what would have taken

those capitals which cannot find employment, either in the agriculture or in the manufactures of the country, either in its home

place without it. By means of the monopoly which our merchants
and manufacturers enjoy there, the same quantity might frequently,

trade, or in its foreign trade of consumption.
The revenue of the customs, instead of suffering, profits from

perhaps, be sent thither, though the whole duties were retained.
The drawback, therefore, may frequently be pure loss to the rev-

such drawbacks, by that part of the duty which is retained. If the
whole duties had been retained, the foreign goods upon which

enue of excise and customs, without altering the state of the trade,
or rendering it in any respect more extensive. How far such draw-

they are paid could seldom have been exported, nor consequently
imported, for want of a market. The duties, therefore, of which a

backs can be justified as a proper encouragement to the industry
of our colonies, or how far it is advantageous to the mother coun-

part is retained, would never have been paid.
These reasons seem sufficiently to justify drawbacks, and would

try that they should be exempted from taxes which are paid by all
the rest of their fellow-subjects, will appear hereafter, when I come

justify them, though the whole duties, whether upon the produce
of domestic industry or upon foreign goods, were always drawn

to treat of colonies.
Drawbacks, however, it must always be understood, are useful

back upon exportation. The revenue of excise would, in this case
indeed, suffer a little, and that of the customs a good deal more;

only in those cases in which the goods, for the exportation of
which they are given, are really exported to some foreign country,

but the natural balance of industry, the natural division and distribution of labour, which is always more or less disturbed by such

and not clandestinely re-imported into our own. That some drawbacks, particularly those upon tobacco, have frequently been abused

duties, would be more nearly re-established by such a regulation.
These reasons, however, will justify drawbacks only upon ex-

in this manner, and have given occasion to many frauds, equally
hurtful both to the revenue and to the fair trader, is well known.

porting goods to those countries which are altogether foreign and

404

Adam Smith

CHAPTER V

ket, can be carried on without a bounty. Every such branch is
evidently upon a level with all the other branches of trade which are

OF BOUNTIES

carried on without bounties, and cannot, therefore, require one more
than they. Those trades only require bounties, in which the mer-

BOUNTIES UPON EXPORTATION are, in Great Britain, frequently pe-

chant is obliged to sell his goods for a price which does not replace
to him his capital, together with the ordinary profit, or in which he

titioned for, and sometimes granted, to the produce of particular
branches of domestic industry. By means of them, our merchants
and manufacturers, it is pretended, will be enabled to sell their
goods as cheap or cheaper than their rivals in the foreign market.
A greater quantity, it is said, will thus be exported, and the balance
of trade consequently turned more in favour of our own country.
We cannot give our workmen a monopoly in the foreign, as we
have done in the home market. We cannot force foreigners to buy
their goods, as we have done our own countrymen. The next best
expedient, it has been thought, therefore, is to pay them for buying. It is in this manner that the mercantile system proposes to
enrich the whole country, and to put money into all our pockets,
by means of the balance of trade.
Bounties, it is allowed, ought to be given to those branches of
trade only which cannot be carried on without them. But every
branch of trade in which the merchant can sell his goods for a
price which replaces to him, with the ordinary profits of stock, the
whole capital employed in preparing and sending them to mar-

is obliged to sell them for less than it really cost him to send them to
market. The bounty is given in order to make up this loss, and to
encourage him to continue, or, perhaps, to begin a trade, of which
the expense is supposed to be greater than the returns, of which
every operation eats up a part of the capital employed in it, and
which is of such a nature, that if all other trades resembled it, there
would soon be no capital left in the country.
The trades, it is to be observed, which are carried on by means
of bounties, are the only ones which can be carried on between
two nations for any considerable time together, in such a manner
as that one of them shall alway’s and regularly lose, or sell its goods
for less than it really cost to send them to market. But if the bounty
did not repay to the merchant what he would otherwise lose upon
the price of his goods, his own interest would soon oblige him to
employ his stock in another way, or to find out a trade in which
the price of the goods would replace to him, with the ordinary
profit, the capital employed in sending them to market. The effect

405

The Wealth of Nations
of bounties, like that of all the other expedients of the mercantile
system, can only be to force the trade of a country into a channel

thought necessary to grant a bounty, is the supposed insufficiency
of the price to do this.

much less advantageous than that in which it would naturally run
of its own accord.

The average price of corn, it has been said, has fallen considerably since the establishment of the bounty. That the average price

The ingenious and well-informed author of the Tracts upon the
Corn Trade has shown very clearly, that since the bounty upon the

of corn began to fall somewhat towards the end of the last century, and has continued to do so during the course of the sixty-

exportation of corn was first established, the price of the corn
exported, valued moderately enough, has exceeded that of the corn

four first years of the present, I have already endeavoured to show.
But this event, supposing it to be real, as I believe it to be, must

imported, valued very high, by a much greater sum than the
amount of the whole bounties which have been paid during that

have happened in spite of the bounty, and cannot possibly have
happened in consequence of it. It has happened in France, as well

period. This, he imagines, upon the true principles of the mercantile system, is a clear proof that this forced corn trade is beneficial

as in England, though in France there was not only no bounty,
but, till 1764, the exportation of corn was subjected to a general

to the nation, the value of the exportation exceeding that of the
importation by a much greater sum than the whole extraordinary

prohibition. This gradual fall in the average price of grain, it is
probable, therefore, is ultimately owing neither to the one regula-

expense which the public has been at in order to get it exported.
He does not consider that this extraordinary expense, or the bounty,

tion nor to the other, but to that gradual and insensible rise in the
real value of silver, which, in the first book of this discourse, I have

is the smallest part of the expense which the exportation of corn
really costs the society. The capital which the farmer employed in

endeavoured to show, has taken place in the general market of
Europe during the course of the present century. It seems to be

raising it must likewise be taken into the account. Unless the price
of the corn, when sold in the foreign markets, replaces not only

altogether impossible that the bounty could ever contribute to
lower the price of grain.

the bounty, but this capital, together with the ordinary profits of
stock, the society is a loser by the difference, or the national stock

In years of plenty, it has already been observed, the bounty, by
occasioning an extraordinary exportation, necessarily keeps up the

is so much diminished. But the very reason for which it has been

price of corn in the home market above what it would naturally

406

Adam Smith
fall to. To do so was the avowed purpose of the institution. In
years of scarcity, though the bounty is frequently suspended, yet

occasioned by the bounty must, in every particular year, be altogether at the expense of the home market; as every bushel of corn,

the great exportation which it occasions in years of plenty, must
frequently hinder, more or less, the plenty of one year from reliev-

which is exported by means of the bounty, and which would not
have been exported without the bounty, would have remained in

ing the scarcity of another. Both in years of plenty and in years of
scarcity, therefore, the bounty necessarily tends to raise the money

the home market to increase the consumption, and to lower the
price of that commodity. The corn bounty, it is to be observed, as

price of corn somewhat higher than it otherwise would be in the
home market.

well as every other bounty upon exportation, imposes two different taxes upon the people; first, the tax which they are obliged to

That in the actual state of tillage the bounty must necessarily
have this tendency, will not, I apprehend, be disputed by any rea-

contribute, in order to pay the bounty; and, secondly, the tax which
arises from the advanced price of the commodity in the home

sonable person. But it has been thought by many people, that it
tends to encourage tillage, and that in two different ways; first, by

market, and which, as the whole body of the people are purchasers of corn, must, in this particular commodity, be paid by the

opening a more extensive foreign market to the corn of the farmer,
it tends, they imagine, to increase the demand for, and conse-

whole body of the people. In this particular commodity, therefore, this second tax is by much the heaviest of the two. Let us

quently the production of, that commodity; and, secondly by securing to him a better price than he could otherwise expect in the

suppose that, taking one year with another, the bounty of 5s. upon
the exportation of the quarter of wheat raises the price of that

actual state of tillage, it tends, they suppose, to encourage tillage.
This double encouragement must they imagine, in a long period

commodity in the home market only 6d. the bushel, or 4s. the
quarter higher than it otherwise would have been in the actual

of years, occasion such an increase in the production of corn, as
may lower its price in the home market, much more than the

state of the crop. Even upon this very moderate supposition, the
great body of the people, over and above contributing the tax which

bounty can raise it in the actual state which tillage may, at the end
of that period, happen to be in.

pays the bounty of 5s. upon every quarter of wheat exported, must
pay another of 4s. upon every quarter which they themselves con-

I answer, that whatever extension of the foreign market can be

sume. But according to the very well informed author of the Tracts

407

The Wealth of Nations
upon the Corn Trade, the average proportion of the corn exported
to that consumed at home, is not more than that of one to thirty-

the farmer, must necessarily encourage its production.
I answer, that this might be the case, if the effect of the bounty

one. For every 5s. therefore, which they contribute to the payment of the first tax, they must contribute £6:4s. to the payment

was to raise the real price of corn, or to enable the farmer, with an
equal quantity of it, to maintain a greater number of labourers in

of the second. So very heavy a tax upon the first necessary of lifemust either reduce the subsistence of the labouring poor, or it

the same manner, whether liberal, moderate, or scanty, than other
labourers are commonly maintained in his neighbourhood. But

must occasion some augmentation in their pecuniary wages, proportionable to that in the pecuniary price of their subsistence. So

neither the bounty, it is evident, nor any other human institution,
can have any such effect. It is not the real, but the nominal price

far as it operates in the one way, it must reduce the ability of the
labouring poor to educate and bring up their children, and must,

of corn, which can in any considerable degree be affected by the
bounty. And though the tax, which that institution imposes upon

so far, tend to restrain the population of the country. So far as it
operate’s in the other, it must reduce the ability of the employers

the whole body of the people, may be very burdensome to those
who pay it, it is of very little advantage to those who receive it.

of the poor, to employ so great a number as they otherwise might
do, and must so far tend to restrain the industry of the country.

The real effect of the bounty is not so much to raise the real
value of corn, as to degrade the real value of silver; or to make an

The extraordinary exportation of corn, therefore occasioned by
the bounty, not only in every particular year diminishes the home,

equal quantity of it exchange for a smaller quantity, not only of
corn, but of all other home made commodities; for the money

just as much as it extends the foreign market and consumption,
but, by restraining the population and industry of the country, its

price of corn regulates that of all other home made commodities.
It regulates the money price of labour, which must always be

final tendency is to stint and restrain the gradual extension of the
home market; and thereby, in the long-run, rather to diminish

such as to enable the labourer to purchase a quantity of corn sufficient to maintain him and his family, either in the liberal, mod-

than to augment the whole market and consumption of corn.
This enhancement of the money price of corn, however, it has

erate, or scanty manner, in which the advancing, stationary, or
declining, circumstances of the society, oblige his employers to

been thought, by rendering that commodity more profitable to

maintain him.

408

Adam Smith
It regulates the money price of all the other parts of the rude
produce of land, which, in every period of improvement, must

not be able to cultivate much better; the landlord will not be able
to live much better. In the purchase of foreign commodities, this

bear a certain proportion to that of corn, though this proportion
is different in different periods. It regulates, for example, the money

enhancement in the price of corn may give them some little advantage. In that of home made commodities, it can give them

price of grass and hay, of butcher’s meat, of horses, and the maintenance of horses, of land carriage consequently, or of the greater

none at all. And almost the whole expense of the farmer, and the
far greater part even of that of the landlord, is in home made

part of the inland commerce of the country.
By regulating the money price of all the other parts of the rude

commodities.
That degradation in the value of silver, which is the effect of the

produce of land, it regulates that of the materials of almost all
manufactures; by regulating the money price of labour, it regu-

fertility of the mines, and which operates equally, or very nearly
equally, through the greater part of the commercial world, is a

lates that of manufacturing art and industry; and by regulating
both, it regulates that of the complete manufacture. The money

matter of very little consequence to any particular country. The
consequent rise of all money prices, though it does not make those

price of labour, and of every thing that is the produce, either of
land or labour, must necessarily either rise or fall in proportion to

who receive them really richer, does not make them really poorer.
A service of plate becomes really cheaper, and every thing else

the money price of corn.
Though in consequence of the bounty, therefore, the farmer

remains precisely of the same real value as before.
But that degradation in the value of silver, which, being the effect

should be enabled to sell his corn for 4s. the bushel, instead of
3s:6d. and to pay his landlord a money rent proportionable to this

either of the peculiar situation or of the political institutions of a
particular country, takes place only in that country, is a matter of

rise in the money price of his produce; yet if, in consequence of
this rise in the price of corn, 4s. will purchase no more home

very great consequence, which, far from tending to make anybody
really richer, tends to make every body really poorer. The rise in the

made goods of any other kind than 3s. 6d. would have done before, neither the circumstances of the farmer, nor those of the

money price of all commodities, which is in this case peculiar to
that country, tends to discourage more or less every sort of industry

landlord, will be much mended by this change. The farmer will

which is carried on within it, and to enable foreign nations, by fur-

409

The Wealth of Nations
nishing almost all sorts of goods for a smaller quantity of silver than
its own workmen can afford to do, to undersell them, not only in

their land and labour will allow them to employ, in coin, plate,
gilding, and other ornaments of gold and silver. When they have

the foreign, but even in the home market.
It is the peculiar situation of Spain and Portugal, as proprietors

got this quantity, the dam is full, and the whole stream which
flows in afterwards must run over. The annual exportation of gold

of the mines, to be the distributers of gold and silver to all the
other countries of Europe. Those metals ought naturally, there-

and silver from Spain and Portugal, accordingly, is, by all accounts,
notwithstanding these restraints, very near equal to the whole an-

fore, to be somewhat cheaper in Spain and Portugal than in any
other part of Europe. The difference, however, should be no more

nual importation. As the water, however, must always be deeper
behind the dam-head than before it, so the quantity of gold and

than the amount of the freight and insurance; and, on account of
the great value and small bulk of those metals, their freight is no

silver which these restraints detain in Spain and Portugal, must, in
proportion to the annual produce of their land and labour, be

great matter, and their insurance is the same as that of any other
goods of equal value. Spain and Portugal, therefore, could suffer

greater than what is to be found in other countries. The higher
and stronger the dam-head, the greater must be the difference in

very little from their peculiar situation, if they did not aggravate
its disadvantages by their political institutions.

the depth of water behind and before it. The higher the tax, the
higher the penalties with which the prohibition is guarded, the

Spain by taxing, and Portugal by prohibiting, the exportation
of gold and silver, load that exportation with the expense of smug-

more vigilant and severe the police which looks after the execution of the law, the greater must be the difference in the propor-

gling, and raise the value of those metals in other countries so
much more above what it is in their own, by the whole amount of

tion of gold and silver to the annual produce of the land and
labour of Spain and Portugal, and to that of other countries. It is

this expense. When you dam up a stream of water, as soon as the
dam is full, as much water must run over the dam-head as if there

said, accordingly, to be very considerable, and that you frequently
find there a profusion of plate in houses, where there is nothing

was no dam at all. The prohibition of exportation cannot detain a
greater quantity of gold and silver in Spain and Portugal, than

else which would in other countries be thought suitable or correspondent to this sort of magnificence. The cheapness of gold and

what they can afford to employ, than what the annual produce of

silver, or, what is the same thing, the dearness of all commodities,

410

Adam Smith
which is the necessary effect of this redundancy of the precious
metals, discourages both the agriculture and manufactures of Spain

labour, would fall, and would be expressed or represented by a
smaller quantity of silver than before; but their real value would

and Portugal, and enables foreign nations to supply them with
many sorts of rude, and with almost all sorts of manufactured

be the same as before, and would be sufficient to maintain, command, and employ the same quantity of labour. As the nominal

produce, for a smaller quantity of gold and silver than what they
themselves can either raise or make them for at home. The tax and

value of their goods would fall, the real value of what remained of
their gold and silver would rise, and a smaller quantity of those

prohibition operate in two different ways. They not only lower
very much the value of the precious metals in Spain and Portugal,

metals would answer all the same purposes of commerce and circulation which had employed a greater quantity before. The gold

but by detaining there a certain quantity of those metals which
would otherwise flow over other countries, they keep up their value

and silver which would go abroad would not go abroad for nothing, but would bring back an equal value of goods of some kind or

in those other countries somewhat above what it otherwise would
be, and thereby give those countries a double advantage in their

other. Those goods, too, would not be all matters of mere luxury
and expense, to be consumed by idle people, who produce nothing

commerce with Spain and Portugal. Open the flood-gates, and
there will presently be less water above, and more below the dam-

in return for their consumption. As the real wealth and revenue of
idle people would not be augmented by this extraordinary exporta-

head, and it will soon come to a level in both places. Remove the
tax and the prohibition, and as the quantity of gold and silver will

tion of gold and silver, so neither would their consumption be much
augmented by it. Those goods would probably, the greater part of

diminish considerably in Spain and Portugal, so it will increase
somewhat in other countries; and the value of those metals, their

them, and certainly some part of them, consist in materials, tools,
and provisions, for the employment and maintenance of industri-

proportion to the annual produce of land and labour, will soon
come to a level, or very near to a level, in all. The loss which Spain

ous people, who would reproduce, with a profit, the full value of
their consumption. A part of the dead stock of the society would

and Portugal could sustain by this exportation of their gold and
silver, would be altogether nominal and imaginary. The nominal

thus be turned into active stock, and would put into motion a greater
quantity of industry than had been employed before. The annual

value of their goods, and of the annual produce of their land and

produce of their land and labour would immediately be augmented

411

The Wealth of Nations
a little, and in a few years would probably be augmented a great
deal; their industry being thus relieved from one of the most op-

quantity of labour which a certain quantity of corn can maintain
and employ, but only the quantity of silver which it will exchange

pressive burdens which it at present labours under.
The bounty upon the exportation of corn necessarily operates

for; it discourages our manufactures, without rendering any considerable service, either to our farmers or country gentlemen. It

exactly in the same way as this absurd policy of Spain and Portugal. Whatever be the actual state of tillage, it renders our corn

puts, indeed, a little more money into the pockets of both, and it
will perhaps be somewhat difficult to persuade the greater part of

somewhat dearer in the home market than it otherwise would be
in that state, and somewhat cheaper in the foreign; and as the

them that this is not rendering them a very considerable service.
But if this money sinks in its value, in the quantity of labour,

average money price of corn regulates, more or less, that of all
other commodities, it lowers the value of silver considerably in

provisions, and home-made commodities of all different kinds
which it is capable of purchasing, as much as it rises in its quan-

the one, and tends to raise it a little in the other. It enables foreigners, the Dutch in particular, not only to eat our corn cheaper than

tity, the service will be little more than nominal and imaginary.
There is, perhaps, but one set of men in the whole common-

they otherwise could do, but sometimes to eat it cheaper than
even our own people can do upon the same occasions; as we are

wealth to whom the bounty either was or could be essentially serviceable. These were the corn merchants, the exporters and im-

assured by an excellent authority, that of Sir Matthew Decker. It
hinders our own workmen from furnishing their goods for so small

porters of corn. In years of plenty, the bounty necessarily occasioned a greater exportation than would otherwise have taken place;

a quantity of silver as they otherwise might do, and enables the
Dutch to furnish theirs for a smaller. It tends to render our manu-

and by hindering the plenty of the one year from relieving the
scarcity of another, it occasioned in years of scarcity a greater im-

factures somewhat dearer in every market, and theirs somewhat
cheaper, than they otherwise would be, and consequently to give

portation than would otherwise have been necessary. It increased
the business of the corn merchant in both; and in the years of

their industry a double advantage over our own.
The bounty, as it raises in the home market, not so much the

scarcity, it not only enabled him to import a greater quantity, but
to sell it for a better price, and consequently with a greater profit,

real, as the nominal price of our corn; as it augments, not the

than he could otherwise have made, if the plenty of one year had

412

Adam Smith
not been more or less hindered from relieving the scarcity of another. It is in this set of men, accordingly, that I have observed the

themselves, or to employ a greater quantity of labour in those
particular manufactures. You really encourage those manufactures,

greatest zeal for the continuance or renewal of the bounty.
Our country gentlemen, when they imposed the high duties

and direct towards them a greater quantity of the industry of the
country than what would properly go to them of its own accord.

upon the exportation of foreign corn, which in times of moderate
plenty amount to a prohibition, and when they established the

But when, by the like institutions, you raise the nominal or money
price of corn, you do not raise its real value; you do not increase

bounty, seem to have imitated the conduct of our manufacturers.
By the one institution, they secured to themselves the monopoly

the real wealth, the real revenue, either of our farmers or country
gentlemen; you do not encourage the growth of corn, because you

of the home market, and by the other they endeavoured to prevent that market from ever being overstocked with their com-

do not enable them to maintain and employ more labourers in
raising it. The nature of things has stamped upon corn a real value,

modity. By both they endeavoured to raise its real value, in the
same manner as our manufacturers had, by the like institutions,

which cannot be altered by merely altering its money price. No
bounty upon exportation, no monopoly of the home market, can

raised the real value of many different sorts of manufactured goods.
They did not, perhaps, attend to the great and essential difference

raise that value. The freest competition cannot lower it, Through
the world in general, that value is equal to the quantity of labour

which nature has established between corn and almost every other
sort of goods. When, either by the monopoly of the home market,

which it can maintain, and in every particular place it is equal to
the quantity of labour which it can maintain in the way, whether

or by a bounty upon exportation, you enable our woollen or linen
manufacturers to sell their goods for somewhat a better price than

liberal, moderate, or scanty, in which labour is commonly maintained in that place. Woollen or linen cloth are not the regulating

they otherwise could get for them, you raise, not only the nominal, but the real price of those goods; you render them equivalent

commodities by which the real value of all other commodities
must be finally measured and determined; corn is. The real value

to a greater quantity of labour and subsistence; you increase not
only the nominal, but the real profit, the real wealth and revenue

of every other commodity is finally measured and determined by
the proportion which its average money price bears to the average

of those manufacturers; and you enable them, either to live better

money price of corn. The real value of corn does not vary with

413

The Wealth of Nations
those variations in its average money price, which sometimes occur from one century to another; it is the real value of silver which

commodity; and by lowering somewhat the real value of silver,
they discouraged, in some degree, the general industry of the coun-

varies with them.
Bounties upon the exportation of any homemade commodity

try, and, instead of advancing, retarded more or less the improvement of their own lands, which necessarily depend upon the gen-

are liable, first, to that general objection which may be made to all
the different expedients of the mercantile system; the objection of

eral industry of the country.
To encourage the production of any commodity, a bounty upon

forcing some part of the industry of the country into a channel
less advantageous than that in which it would run of its own ac-

production, one should imagine, would have a more direct operation than one upon exportation. It would, besides, impose only

cord; and, secondly, to the particular objection of forcing it not
only into a channel that is less advantageous, but into one that is

one tax upon the people, that which they must contribute in order to pay the bounty. Instead of raising, it would tend to lower

actually disadvantageous; the trade which cannot be carried on
but by means of a bounty being necessarily a losing trade. The

the price of the commodity in the home market; and thereby,
instead of imposing a second tax upon the people, it might, at

bounty upon the exportation of corn is liable to this further objection, that it can in no respect promote the raising of that par-

least in part, repay them for what they had contributed to the
first. Bounties upon production, however, have been very rarely

ticular commodity of which it was meant to encourage the production. When our country gentlemen, therefore, demanded the

granted. The prejudices established by the commercial system have
taught us to believe, that national wealth arises more immediately

establishment of the bounty, though they acted in imitation of
our merchants and manufacturers, they did not act with that com-

from exportation than from production. It has been more favoured,
accordingly, as the more immediate means of bringing money into

plete comprehension of their own interest, which commonly directs the conduct of those two other orders of people. They loaded

the country. Bounties upon production, it has been said too, have
been found by experience more liable to frauds than those upon

the public revenue with a very considerable expense: they imposed
a very heavy tax upon the whole body of the people; but they did

exportation. How far this is true, I know not. That bounties upon
exportation have been abused, to many fraudulent purposes, is

not, in any sensible degree, increase the real value of their own

very well known. But it is not the interest of merchants and manu-

414

Adam Smith
facturers, the great inventors of all these expedients, that the home
market should be overstocked with their goods; an event which a

try is employed in bringing goods to market, of which the price
does not repay the cost, together with the ordinary profits of stock.

bounty upon production might sometimes occasion. A bounty
upon exportation, by enabling them to send abroad their surplus

But though the tonnage bounties to those fisheries do not contribute to the opulence of the nation, it may, perhaps, be thought

part, and to keep up the price of what remains in the home market, effectually prevents this. Of all the expedients of the mercan-

that they contribute to its defence, by augmenting the number of
its sailors and shipping. This, it may be alleged, may sometimes be

tile system, accordingly, it is the one of which they are the fondest.
I have known the different undertakers of some particular works

done by means of such bounties, at a much smaller expense than
by keeping up a great standing navy, if I may use such an expres-

agree privately among themselves to give a bounty out of their
own pockets upon the exportation of a certain proportion of the

sion, in the same way as a standing army.
Notwithstanding these favourable allegations, however, the fol-

goods which they dealt in. This expedient succeeded so well, that
it more than doubled the price of their goods in the home market,

lowing considerations dispose me to believe, that in granting at
least one of these bounties, the legislature has been very grossly

notwithstanding a very considerable increase in the produce. The
operation of the bounty upon corn must have been wonderfully

imposed upon:
First,

different, if it has lowered the money price of that commodity.
Something like a bounty upon production, however, has been

The herring-buss bounty seems too large.
From the commencement of the winter fishing 1771, to the

granted upon some particular occasions. The tonnage bounties
given to the white herring and whale fisheries may, perhaps, be

end of the winter fishing 1781, the tonnage bounty upon the herring-buss fishery has been at thirty shillings the ton. During these

considered as somewhat of this nature. They tend directly, it may
be supposed, to render the goods cheaper in the home market

eleven years, the whole number of barrels caught by the herringbuss fishery of Scotland amounted to 378,347. The herrings caught

than they otherwise would be. In other respects, their effects, it
must be acknowledged, are the same as those of bounties upon

and cured at sea are called sea-sticks. In order to render them what
are called merchantable herrings, it is necessary to repack them

exportation. By means of them, a part of the capital of the coun-

with an additional quantity of salt; and in this case, it is reckoned,

415

The Wealth of Nations
that three barrels of sea-sticks are usually repacked into two barrels of merchantable herrings. The number of barrels of merchant-

livered from the works to the fish-curers, to no more than 168,226,
at fifty-six pounds the bushel only. It would appear, therefore,

able herrings, therefore, caught during these eleven years, will
amount only, according to this account, to 252,231¼. During

that it is principally foreign salt that is used in the fisheries. Upon
every barrel of herrings exported, there is, besides, a bounty of

these eleven years, the tonnage bounties paid amounted to
£155,463:11s. or 8s:2¼d. upon every barrel of sea-sticks, and to

2s:8d. and more than two-thirds of the buss-caught herrings are
exported. Put all these things together, and you will find that,

12s:3¾d. upon every barrel of merchantable herrings.
The salt with which these herrings are cured is sometimes Scotch,

during these eleven years, every barrel of buss-caught herrings,
cured with Scotch salt, when exported, has cost government

and sometimes foreign salt; both which are delivered, free of all
excise duty, to the fish-curers. The excise duty upon Scotch salt is

17s:11¾d.; and, when entered for home consumption, 14s:3¾d.;
and that every barrel cured with foreign salt, when exported, has

at present 1s:6d., that upon foreign salt 10s. the bushel. A barrel
of herrings is supposed to require about one bushel and one-fourth

cost government £1:7:5¾d.; and, when entered for home consumption, £1:3:9¾d. The price of a barrel of good merchantable

of a bushel foreign salt. Two bushels are the supposed average of
Scotch salt. If the herrings are entered for exportation, no part of

herrings runs from seventeen and eighteen to four and five-andtwenty shillings; about a guinea at an average. {See the accounts at

this duty is paid up; if entered for home consumption, whether
the herrings were cured with foreign or with Scotch salt, only one

the end of this Book.}
Secondly,

shilling the barrel is paid up. It was the old Scotch duty upon a
bushel of salt, the quantity which, at a low estimation, had been

The bounty to the white-herring fishery is a tonnage bounty,
and is proportioned to the burden of the ship, not to her diligence

supposed necessary for curing a barrel of herrings. In Scotland,
foreign salt is very little used for any other purpose but the curing

or success in the fishery; and it has, I am afraid, been too common
for the vessels to fit out for the sole purpose of catching, not the

of fish. But from the 5th April 1771 to the 5th April 1782, the
quantity of foreign salt imported amounted to 936,974 bushels,

fish but the bounty. In the year 1759, when the bounty was at
fifty shillings the ton, the whole buss fishery of Scotland brought

at eighty-four pounds the bushel; the quantity of Scotch salt de-

in only four barrels of sea-sticks. In that year, each barrel of sea-

416

Adam Smith
sticks cost government, in bounties alone, £113:15s.; each barrel
of merchantable herrings £159:7:6.

sumed fresh. But the great encouragement which a bounty of 30s.
the ton gives to the buss-fishery, is necessarily a discouragement to

Thirdly,
The mode of fishing, for which this tonnage bounty in the white

the boat-fishery, which, having no such bounty, cannot bring its
cured fish to market upon the same terms as the buss-fishery. The

herring fishery has been given (by busses or decked vessels from
twenty to eighty tons burden ), seems not so well adapted to the

boat-fishery; accordingly, which, before the establishment of the
buss-bounty, was very considerable, and is said to have employed a

situation of Scotland, as to that of Holland, from the practice of
which country it appears to have been borrowed. Holland lies at a

number of seamen, not inferior to what the buss-fishery employs at
present, is now gone almost entirely to decay. Of the former extent,

great distance from the seas to which herrings are known principally to resort, and can, therefore, carry on that fishery only in

however, of this now ruined and abandoned fishery, I must acknowledge that I cannot pretend to speak with much precision. As no

decked vessels, which can carry water and provisions sufficient for
a voyage to a distant sea; but the Hebrides, or Western Islands, the

bounty was-paid upon the outfit of the boat-fishery, no account
was taken of it by the officers of the customs or salt duties.

islands of Shetland, and the northern and north-western coasts of
Scotland, the countries in whose neighbourhood the herring fish-

Fourthly,
In many parts of Scotland, during certain seasons of the year,

ery is principally carried on, are everywhere intersected by arms of
the sea, which run up a considerable way into the land, and which,

herrings make no inconsiderable part of the food of the common
people. A bounty which tended to lower their price in the home

in the language of the country, are called sea-lochs. It is to these
sea-lochs that the herrings principally resort during the seasons in

market, might contribute a good deal to the relief of a great number of our fellow-subjects, whose circumstances are by no means

which they visit these seas; for the visits of this, and, I am assured,
of many other sorts of fish, are not quite regular and constant. A

affluent. But the herring-bus bounty contributes to no such good
purpose. It has ruined the boat fishery, which is by far the best

boat-fishery, therefore, seems to be the mode of fishing best adapted
to the peculiar situation of Scotland, the fishers carrying the her-

adapted for the supply of the home market; and the additional
bounty of 2s:8d. the barrel upon exportation, carries the greater

rings on shore as fast as they are taken, to be either cured or con-

part, more than two-thirds, of the produce of the buss-fishery

417

The Wealth of Nations
abroad. Between thirty and forty years ago, before the establishment of the buss-bounty, 16s. the barrel, I have been assured, was

to do before, it might be expected that their profits should be very
great; and it is not improbable that those of some individuals may

the common price of white herrings. Between ten and fifteen years
ago, before the boat-fishery was entirely ruined, the price was said

have been so. In general, however, I have every reason to believe
they have been quite otherwise. The usual effect of such bounties

to have run from seventeen to twenty shillings the barrel. For these
last five years, it has, at an average, been at twenty-five shillings

is, to encourage rash undertakers to adventure in a business which
they do not understand; and what they lose by their own negli-

the barrel. This high price, however, may have been owing to the
real scarcity of the herrings upon the coast of Scotland. I must

gence and ignorance, more than compensates all that they can
gain by the utmost liberality of government. In 1750, by the same

observe, too, that the cask or barrel, which is usually sold with the
herrings, and of which the price is included in all the foregoing

act which first gave the bounty of 30s. the ton for the encouragement of the white herring fishery (the 23d Geo. II. chap. 24), a

prices, has, since the commencement of the American war, risen
to about double its former price, or from about 3s. to about 6s. I

joint stock company was erected, with a capital of £500,000, to
which the subscribers (over and above all other encouragements,

must likewise observe, that the accounts I have received of the
prices of former times, have been by no means quite uniform and

the tonnage bounty just now mentioned, the exportation bounty
of 2s:8d. the barrel, the delivery of both British and foreign salt

consistent, and an old man of great accuracy and experience has
assured me, that, more than fifty years ago, a guinea was the usual

duty free) were, during the space of fourteen years, for every hundred pounds which they subscribed and paid into the stock of the

price of a barrel of good merchantable herrings; and this, I imagine, may still be looked upon as the average price. All accounts,

society, entitled to three pounds a-year, to be paid by the receivergeneral of the customs in equal half-yearly payments. Besides this

however, I think, agree that the price has not been lowered in the
home market in consequence of the buss-bounty.

great company, the residence of whose governor and directors was
to be in London, it was declared lawful to erect different fishing

When the undertakers of fisheries, after such liberal bounties
have been bestowed upon them, continue to sell their commodity

chambers in all the different out-ports of the kingdom, provided a
sum not less than £10,000 was subscribed into the capital of each,

at the same, or even at a higher price than they were accustomed

to be managed at its own risk, and for its own profit and loss. The

418

Adam Smith
same annuity, and the same encouragements of all kinds, were given
to the trade of those inferior chambers as to that of the great com-

In public, as well as in private expenses, great wealth, may, perhaps,
frequently be admitted as an apology for great folly. But there must

pany. The subscription of the great company was soon filled up,
and several different fishing chambers were erected in the different

surely be something more than ordinary absurdity in continuing
such profusion in times of general difficulty and distress.

out-ports of the kingdom. In spite of all these encouragements, almost all those different companies, both great and small, lost either

What is called a bounty, is sometimes no more than a drawback, and, consequently, is not liable to the same objections as

the whole or the greater part of their capitals; scarce a vestige now
remains of any of them, and the white-herring fishery is now en-

what is properly a bounty. The bounty, for example, upon refined
sugar exported, may be considered as a drawback of the duties

tirely, or almost entirely, carried on by private adventurers.
If any particular manufacture was necessary, indeed, for the de-

upon the brown and Muscovado sugars, from which it is made;
the bounty upon wrought silk exported, a drawback of the duties

fence of the society, it might not always be prudent to depend
upon our neighbours for the supply; and if such manufacture could

upon raw and thrown silk imported; the bounty upon gunpowder exported, a drawback of the duties upon brimstone and salt-

not otherwise be supported at home, it might not be unreasonable that all the other branches of industry should be taxed in

petre imported. In the language of the customs, those allowances
only are called drawbacks which are given upon goods exported in

order to support it. The bounties upon the exportation of British
made sail-cloth, and British made gunpowder, may, perhaps, both

the same form in which they are imported. When that form has
been so altered by manufacture of any kind as to come under a

be vindicated upon this principle.
But though it can very seldom be reasonable to tax the industry

new denomination, they are called bounties.
Premiums given by the public to artists and manufacturers, who

of the great body of the people, in order to support that of some
particular class of manufacturers; yet, in the wantonness of great

excel in their particular occupations, are not liable to the same
objections as bounties. By encouraging extraordinary dexterity and

prosperity, when the public enjoys a greater revenue than it knows
well what to do with, to give such bounties to favourite manufac-

ingenuity, they serve to keep up the emulation of the workmen
actually employed in those respective occupations, and are not

tures, may, perhaps, be as natural as to incur any other idle expense.

considerable enough to turn towards any one of them a greater

419

The Wealth of Nations
share of the capital of the country than what would go to it of its
own accord. Their tendency is not to overturn the natural balance

the same person, are, in their own nature, four separate and distinct trades. These are, first, the trade of the inland dealer; sec-

of employments, but to render the work which is done in each as
perfect and complete as possible. The expense of premiums, be-

ondly, that of the merchant-importer for home consumption;
thirdly, that of the merchant-exporter of home produce for for-

sides, is very trifling, that of bounties very great. The bounty upon
corn alone has sometimes cost the public, in one year, more than

eign consumption; and, fourthly, that of the merchant-carrier, or
of the importer of corn, in order to export it again.

£300,000.
Bounties are sometimes called premiums, as drawbacks are some-

I. The interest of the inland dealer, and that of the great body of
the people, how opposite soever they may at first appear, are, even

times called bounties. But we must, in all cases, attend to the nature of the thing, without paying any regard to the word.

in years of the greatest scarcity, exactly the same. It is his interest
to raise the price of his corn as high as the real scarcity of the

Digression concerning the Corn Trade and Corn Laws.

season requires, and it can never be his interest to raise it higher.
By raising the price, he discourages the consumption, and puts

I cannot conclude this chapter concerning bounties, without ob-

every body more or less, but particularly the inferior ranks of
people, upon thrift and good management If, by raising it too

serving, that the praises which have been bestowed upon the law
which establishes the bounty upon the exportation of corn, and

high, he discourages the consumption so much that the supply of
the season is likely to go beyond the consumption of the season,

upon that system of regulations which is connected with it, are altogether unmerited. A particular examination of the nature of the

and to last for some time after the next crop begins to come in, he
runs the hazard, not only of losing a considerable part of his corn

corn trade, and of the principal British laws which relate to it, will
sufficiently demonstrate the truth of this assertion. The great im-

by natural causes, but of being obliged to sell what remains of it
for much less than what he might have had for it several months

portance of this subject must justify the length of the digression.
The trade of the corn merchant is composed of four different

before. If, by not raising the price high enough, he discourages the
consumption so little, that the supply of the season is likely to fall

branches, which, though they may sometimes be all carried on by

short of the consumption of the season, he not only loses a part of

420

Adam Smith
the profit which he might otherwise have made, but he exposes
the people to suffer before the end of the season, instead of the

the scarcity of the season requires, yet all the inconveniencies which
the people can suffer from this conduct, which effectually secures

hardships of a dearth, the dreadful horrors of a famine. It is the
interest of the people that their daily, weekly, and monthly con-

them from a famine in the end of the season, are inconsiderable,
in comparison of what they might have been exposed to by a more

sumption should be proportioned as exactly as possible to the supply of the season. The interest of the inland corn dealer is the

liberal way of dealing in the beginning of it the corn merchant
himself is likely to suffer the most by this excess of avarice; not

same. By supplying them, as nearly as he can judge, in this proportion, he is likely to sell all his corn for the highest price, and

only from the indignation which it generally excites against him,
but, though he should escape the effects of this indignation, from

with the greatest profit; and his knowledge of the state of the crop,
and of his daily, weekly, and monthly sales, enables him to judge,

the quantity of corn which it necessarily leaves upon his hands in
the end of the season, and which, if the next season happens to

with more or less accuracy, how far they really are supplied in this
manner. Without intending the interest of the people, he is neces-

prove favourable, he must always sell for a much lower price than
he might otherwise have had.

sarily led, by a regard to his own interest, to treat them, even in
years of scarcity, pretty much in the same manner as the prudent

Were it possible, indeed, for one great company of merchants to
possess themselves of the whole crop of an extensive country, it

master of a vessel is sometimes obliged to treat his crew. When he
foresees that provisions are likely to run short, he puts them upon

might perhaps be their interest to deal with it, as the Dutch are
said to do with the spiceries of the Moluccas, to destroy or throw

short allowance. Though from excess of caution he should sometimes do this without any real necessity, yet all the inconvenien-

away a considerable part of it, in order to keep up the price of the
rest. But it is scarce possible, even by the violence of law, to estab-

cies which his crew can thereby suffer are inconsiderable, in comparison of the danger, misery, and ruin, to which they might some-

lish such an extensive monopoly with regard to corn; and wherever the law leaves the trade free, it is of all commodities the least

times be exposed by a less provident conduct. Though, from excess of avarice, in the same manner, the inland corn merchant

liable to be engrossed or monopolized by the forced a few large
capitals, which buy up the greater part of it. Not only its value far

should sometimes raise the price of his corn somewhat higher than

exceeds what the capitals of a few private men are capable of pur-

421

The Wealth of Nations
chasing; but, supposing they were capable of purchasing it, the
manner in which it is produced renders this purchase altogether

come in. The same motives, the same interests, which would thus
regulate the conduct of any one dealer, would regulate that of

impracticable. As, in every civilized country, it is the commodity
of which the annual consumption is the greatest; so a greater quan-

every other, and oblige them all in general to sell their corn at the
price which, according to the best of their judgment, was most

tity of industry is annually employed in producing corn than in
producing any other commodity. When it first comes from the

suitable to the scarcity or plenty of the season.
Whoever examines, with attention, the history of the dearths

ground, too, it is necessarily divided among a greater number of
owners than any other commodity; and these owners can never be

and famines which have afflicted any part of Europe during either
the course of the present or that of the two preceding centuries, of

collected into one place, like a number of independent manufacturers, but are necessarily scattered through all the different cor-

several of which we have pretty exact accounts, will find, I believe,
that a dearth never has arisen from any combination among the

ners of the country. These first owners either immediately supply
the consumers in their own neighbourhood, or they supply other

inland dealers in corn, nor from any other cause but a real scarcity,
occasioned sometimes, perhaps, and in some particular places, by

inland dealers, who supply those consumers. The inland dealers
in corn, therefore, including both the farmer and the baker, are

the waste of war, but in by far the greatest number of cases by the
fault of the seasons; and that a famine has never arisen from any

necessarily more numerous than the dealers in any other commodity; and their dispersed situation renders it altogether impos-

other cause but the violence of government attempting, by improper means, to remedy the inconveniencies of a dearth.

sible for them to enter into any general combination. If, in a year
of scarcity, therefore, any of them should find that he had a good

In an extensive corn country, between all the different parts of
which there is a free commerce and communication, the scarcity

deal more corn upon hand than, at the current price, he could
hope to dispose of before the end of the season, he would never

occasioned by the most unfavourable seasons can never be so great
as to produce a famine; and the scantiest crop, if managed with

think of keeping up this price to his own loss, and to the sole
benefit of his rivals and competitors, but would immediately lower

frugality and economy, will maintain, through the year, the same
number of people that are commonly fed in a more affluent man-

it, in order to get rid of his corn before the new crop began to

ner by one of moderate plenty. The seasons most unfavourable to

422

Adam Smith
the crop are those of excessive drought or excessive rain. But as
corn grows equally upon high and low lands, upon grounds that

people, and thereby encourages them to consume it so fast as must
necessarily produce a famine before the end of the season. The

are disposed to be too wet, and upon those that are disposed to be
too dry, either the drought or the rain, which is hurtful to one

unlimited, unrestrained freedom of the corn trade, as it is the only
effectual preventive of the miseries of a famine, so it is the best

part of the country, is favourable to another; and though, both in
the wet and in the dry season, the crop is a good deal less than in

palliative of the inconveniencies of a dearth; for the inconveniencies of a real scarcity cannot be remedied; they can only be palli-

one more properly tempered; yet, in both, what is lost in one part
of the country is in some measure compensated by what is gained

ated. No trade deserves more the full protection of the law, and no
trade requires it so much; because no trade is so much exposed to

in the other. In rice countries, where the crop not only requires a
very moist soil, but where, in a certain period of its growing, it

popular odium.
In years of scarcity, the inferior ranks of people impute their

must be laid under water, the effects of a drought are much more
dismal. Even in such countries, however, the drought is, perhaps,

distress to the avarice of the corn merchant, who becomes the
object of their hatred and indignation. Instead of making profit

scarce ever so universal as necessarily to occasion a famine, if the
government would allow a free trade. The drought in Bengal, a

upon such occasions, therefore, he is often in danger of being
utterly ruined, and of having his magazines plundered and de-

few years ago, might probably have occasioned a very great dearth.
Some improper regulations, some injudicious restraints, imposed

stroyed by their violence. It is in years of scarcity, however, when
prices are high, that the corn merchant expects to make his princi-

by the servants of the East India Company upon the rice trade,
contributed, perhaps, to turn that dearth into a famine.

pal profit. He is generally in contract with some farmers to furnish him, for a certain number of years, with a certain quantity of

When the government, in order to remedy the inconveniencies
of a dearth, orders all the dealers to sell their corn at what it sup-

corn, at a certain price. This contract price is settled according to
what is supposed to be the moderate and reasonable, that is, the

poses a reasonable price, it either hinders them from bringing it to
market, which may sometimes produce a famine even in the be-

ordinary or average price, which, before the late years of scarcity,
was commonly about 28s. for the quarter of wheat, and for that of

ginning of the season; or, if they bring it thither, it enables the

other grain in proportion. In years of scarcity, therefore, the corn

423

The Wealth of Nations
merchant buys a great part of his corn for the ordinary price, and
sells it for a much higher. That this extraordinary profit, however,

forfeit double the value; and, for the third, be set in the pillory,
suffer imprisonment during the king’s pleasure, and forfeit all his

is no more than sufficient to put his trade upon a fair level with
other trades, and to compensate the many losses which he sustains

goods and chattels. The ancient policy of most other parts of Europe was no better than that of England.

upon other occasions, both from the perishable nature of the commodity itself, and from the frequent and unforeseen fluctuations

Our ancestors seem to have imagined, that the people would
buy their corn cheaper of the farmer than of the corn merchant,

of its price, seems evident enough, from this single circumstance,
that great fortunes are as seldom made in this as in any other

who, they were afraid, would require, over and above the price
which he paid to the farmer, an exorbitant profit to himself. They

trade. The popular odium, however, which attends it in years of
scarcity, the only years in which it can be very profitable, renders

endeavoured, therefore, to annihilate his trade altogether. They
even endeavoured to hinder, as much as possible, any middle man

people of character and fortune averse to enter into it. It is abandoned to an inferior set of dealers; and millers, bakers, meal-men,

of any kind from coming in between the grower and the consumer; and this was the meaning of the many restraints which

and meal-factors, together with a number of wretched hucksters,
are almost the only middle people that, in the home market, come

they imposed upon the trade of those whom they called kidders,
or carriers of corn; a trade which nobody was allowed to exercise

between the grower and the consumer.
The ancient policy of Europe, instead of discountenancing this

without a licence, ascertaining his qualifications as a man of probity and fair dealing. The authority of three justices of the peace

popular odium against a trade so beneficial to the public, seems,
on the contrary, to have authorised and encouraged it.

was, by the statute of Edward VI. necessary in order to grant this
licence. But even this restraint was afterwards thought insufficient,

By the 5th and 6th of Edward VI cap. 14, it was enacted, that
whoever should buy any corn or grain, with intent to sell it again,

and, by a statute of Elizabeth, the privilege of granting it was confined to the quarter-sessions.

should be reputed an unlawful engrosser, and should, for the first
fault, suffer two months imprisonment, and forfeit the value of

The ancient policy of Europe endeavoured, in this manner, to
regulate agriculture, the great trade of the country, by maxims

the corn; for the second, suffer six months imprisonment, and

quite different from those which it established with regard to manu-

424

Adam Smith
factures, the great trade of the towns. By leaving a farmer no other
customers but either the consumers or their immediate factors,

upon every piece of his own goods, which he sold in his shop, a
profit of twenty per cent. When he carried them from his work-

the kidders and carriers of corn, it endeavoured to force him to
exercise the trade, not only of a farmer, but of a corn merchant, or

house to his shop, he must have valued them at the price for which
he could have sold them to a dealer or shopkeeper, who would

corn retailer. On the contrary, it, in many cases, prohibited the
manufacturer from exercising the trade of a shopkeeper, or from

have bought them by wholesale. If he valued them lower, he lost a
part of the profit of his manufacturing capital. When, again, he

selling his own goods by retail. It meant, by the one law, to promote the general interest of the country, or to render corn cheap,

sold them from his shop, unless he got the same price at which a
shopkeeper would have sold them, he lost a part of the profit of

without, perhaps, its being well understood how this was to be
done. By the other, it meant to promote that of a particular order

his shop-keeping capital. Though he might appear, therefore, to
make a double profit upon the same piece of goods, yet, as these

of men, the shopkeepers, who would be so much undersold by
the manufacturer, it was supposed, that their trade would be ru-

goods made successively a part of two distinct capitals, he made
but a single profit upon the whole capital employed about them;

ined, if he was allowed to retail at all.
The manufacturer, however, though he had been allowed to keep

and if he made less than his profit, he was a loser, and did not
employ his whole capital with the same advantage as the greater

a shop, and to sell his own goods by retail, could not have undersold the common shopkeeper. Whatever part of his capital he might

part of his neighbours.
What the manufacturer was prohibited to do, the farmer was in

have placed in his shop, he must have withdrawn it from his manufacture. In order to carry on his business on a level with that of

some measure enjoined to do; to divide his capital between two
different employments; to keep one part of it in his granaries and

other people, as he must have had the profit of a manufacturer on
the one part, so he must have had that of a shopkeeper upon the

stack-yard, for supplying the occasional demands of the market,
and to employ the other in the cultivation of his land. But as he

other. Let us suppose, for example, that in the particular town
where he lived, ten per cent. was the ordinary profit both of manu-

could not afford to employ the latter for less than the ordinary
profits of farming stock, so he could as little afford to employ the

facturing and shopkeeping stock; he must in this case have charged

former for less than the ordinary profits of mercantile stock.

425

The Wealth of Nations
Whether the stock which really carried on the business of a corn
merchant belonged to the person who was called a farmer, or to the

sole business it was to buy them by wholesale and to retail them
again. The greater part of farmers could still less afford to retail

person who was called a corn merchant, an equal profit was in both
cases requisite, in order to indemnify its owner for employing it in

their own corn, to supply the inhabitants of a town, at perhaps
four or five miles distance from the greater part of them, so cheap

this manner, in order to put his business on a level with other trades,
and in order to hinder him from having an interest to change it as

as a vigilant and active corn merchant, whose sole business it was
to purchase corn by wholesale, to collect it into a great magazine,

soon as possible for some other. The farmer, therefore, who was
thus forced to exercise the trade of a corn merchant, could not af-

and to retail it again.
The law which prohibited the manufacturer from exercising the

ford to sell his corn cheaper than any other corn merchant would
have been obliged to do in the case of a free competition.

trade of a shopkeeper, endeavoured to force this division in the
employment of stock to go on faster than it might otherwise have

The dealer who can employ his whole stock in one single branch
of business, has an advantage of the same kind with the workman

done. The law which obliged the farmer to exercise the trade of a
corn merchant, endeavoured to hinder it from going on so fast.

who can employ his whole labour in one single operation. As the
latter acquires a dexterity which enables him, with the same two

Both laws were evident violations of natural liberty, and therefore
unjust; and they were both, too, as impolitic as they were unjust.

hands, to perform a much greater quantity of work, so the former
acquires so easy and ready a method of transacting his business, of

It is the interest of every society, that things of this kind should
never either he forced or obstructed. The man who employs either

buying and disposing of his goods, that with the same capital he
can transact a much greater quantity of business. As the one can

his labour or his stock in a greater variety of ways than his situation renders necessary, can never hurt his neighbour by undersell-

commonly afford his work a good deal cheaper, so the other can
commonly afford his goods somewhat cheaper, than if his stock

ing him. He may hurt himself, and he generally does so. Jack-ofall-trades will never be rich, says the proverb. But the law ought

and attention were both employed about a greater variety of objects. The greater part of manufacturers could not afford to retail

always to trust people with the care of their own interest, as in
their local situations they must generally be able to judge better of

their own goods so cheap as a vigilant and active shopkeeper, whose

it than the legislature can do. The law, however, which obliged the

426

Adam Smith
farmer to exercise the trade of a corn merchant was by far the
most pernicious of the two.

the wholesale dealer supports that of the manufacturer.
The wholesale dealer, by affording a ready market to the manu-

It obstructed not only that division in the employment of stock
which is so advantageous to every society, but it obstructed like-

facturer, by taking his goods off his hand as fast as he can make
them, and by sometimes even advancing their price to him before

wise the improvement and cultivation of the land. By obliging the
farmer to carry on two trades instead of one, it forced him to

he has made them, enables him to keep his whole capital, and
sometimes even more than his whole capital, constantly employed

divide his capital into two parts, of which one only could be employed in cultivation. But if he had been at liberty to sell his whole

in manufacturing, and consequently to manufacture a much greater
quantity of goods than if he was obliged to dispose of them him-

crop to a corn merchant as fast as he could thresh it out, his whole
capital might have returned immediately to the land, and have

self to the immediate consumers, or even to the retailers. As the
capital of the wholesale merchant, too, is generally sufficient to

been employed in buying more cattle, and hiring more servants,
in order to improve and cultivate it better. But by being obliged to

replace that of many manufacturers, this intercourse between him
and them interests the owner of a large capital to support the owners

sell his corn by retail, he was obliged to keep a great part of his
capital in his granaries and stack-yard through the year, and could

of a great number of small ones, and to assist them in those losses
and misfortunes which might otherwise prove ruinous to them.

not therefore cultivate so well as with the same capital he might
otherwise have done. This law, therefore, necessarily obstructed

An intercourse of the same kind universally established between
the farmers and the corn merchants, would be attended with ef-

the improvement of the land, and, instead of tending to render
corn cheaper, must have tended to render it scarcer, and therefore

fects equally beneficial to the farmers. They would be enabled to
keep their whole capitals, and even more than their whole capitals

dearer, than it would otherwise have been.
After the business of the farmer, that of the corn merchant is in

constantly employed in cultivation. In case of any of those accidents to which no trade is more liable than theirs, they would find

reality the trade which, if properly protected and encouraged,
would contribute the most to the raising of corn. It would sup-

in their ordinary customer, the wealthy corn merchant, a person
who had both an interest to support them, and the ability to do it;

port the trade of the farmer, in the same manner as the trade of

and they would not, as at present, be entirely dependent upon the

427

The Wealth of Nations
forbearance of their landlord, or the mercy of his steward. Were it
possible, as perhaps it is not, to establish this intercourse univer-

grossing or buying of corn, in order to sell it again, as long as the
price of wheat did not exceed 48s. the quarter, and that of other

sally, and all at once; were it possible to turn all at once the whole
farming stock of the kingdom to its proper business, the cultiva-

grain in proportion, was declared lawful to all persons not being
forestallers, that is, not selling again in the same market within

tion of land, withdrawing it from every other employment into
which any part of it may be at present diverted; and were it pos-

three months. All the freedom which the trade of the inland corn
dealer has ever yet enjoyed was bestowed upon it by this statute.

sible, in order to support and assist, upon occasion, the operations
of this great stock, to provide all at once another stock almost

The statute of the twelfth of the present king, which repeals almost all the other ancient laws against engrossers and forestallers,

equally great; it is not, perhaps, very easy to imagine how great,
how extensive, and how sudden, would be the improvement which

does not repeal the restrictions of this particular statute, which
therefore still continue in force.

this change of circumstances would alone produce upon the whole
face of the country.

This statute, however, authorises in some measure two very absurd popular prejudices.

The statute of Edward VI. therefore, by prohibiting as much as
possible any middle man from coming in between the grower and

First,
It supposes, that when the price of wheat has risen so high as

the consumer, endeavoured to annihilate a trade, of which the free
exercise is not only the best palliative of the inconveniencies of a

48s. the quarter, and that of other grain in proportion, corn is
likely to be so engrossed as to hurt the people. But, from what has

dearth, but the best preventive of that calamity; after the trade of
the farmer, no trade contributing so much to the growing of corn

been already said, it seems evident enough, that corn can at no
price be so engrossed by the inland dealers as to hurt the people;

as that of the corn merchant.
The rigour of this law was afterwards softened by several subse-

and 48s. the quarter, besides, though it may be considered as a
very high price, yet, in years of scarcity, it is a price which fre-

quent statutes, which successively permitted the engrossing of corn
when the price of wheat should not exceed 20s. and 24s. 32s. and

quently takes place immediately after harvest, when scarce any
part of the new crop can be sold off, and when it is impossible

40s. the quarter. At last, by the 15th of Charles II. c.7, the en-

even for ignorance to suppose that any part of it can be so en-

428

Adam Smith
grossed as to hurt the people.
Secondly,

to consume faster than suited the real scarcity of the season. When
the scarcity is real, the best thing that can be done for the people

It supposes that there is a certain price at which corn is likely to
be forestalled, that is, bought up in order to be sold again soon

is, to divide the inconvenience of it as equally as possible, through
all the different months and weeks and days of the year. The

after in the same market, so as to hurt the people. But if a merchant ever buys up corn, either going to a particular market, or in

interest of the corn merchant makes him study to do this as
exactly as he can; and as no other person can have either the

a particular market, in order to sell it again soon after in the same
market, it must be because he judges that the market cannot be so

same interest, or the same knowledge, or the same abilities, to
do it so exactly as he, this most important operation of com-

liberally supplied through the whole season as upon that particular occasion, and that the price, therefore, must soon rise. If he

merce ought to be trusted entirely to him; or, in other words,
the corn trade, so far at least as concerns the supply of the home

judges wrong in this, and if the price does not rise, he not only
loses the whole profit of the stock which he employs in this man-

market, ought to be left perfectly free.
The popular fear of engrossing and forestalling may be com-

ner, but a part of the stock itself, by the expense and loss which
necessarily attend the storing and keeping of corn. He hurts him-

pared to the popular terrors and suspicions of witchcraft. The unfortunate wretches accused of this latter crime were not more in-

self, therefore, much more essentially than he can hurt even the
particular people whom he may hinder from supplying themselves

nocent of the misfortunes imputed to them, than those who have
been accused of the former. The law which put an end to all pros-

upon that particular market day, because they may afterwards supply themselves just as cheap upon any other market day. If he

ecutions against witchcraft, which put it out of any man’s power
to gratify his own malice by accusing his neighbour of that imagi-

judges right, instead of hurting the great body of the people, he
renders them a most important service. By making them feel the

nary crime, seems effectually to have put an end to those fears and
suspicions, by taking away the great cause which encouraged and

inconveniencies of a dearth somewhat earlier than they otherwise
might do, he prevents their feeling them afterwards so severely as

supported them. The law which would restore entire freedom to
the inland trade of corn, would probably prove as effectual to put

they certainly would do, if the cheapness of price encouraged them

an end to the popular fears of engrossing and forestalling.

429

The Wealth of Nations
The 15th of Charles II. c. 7, however, with all its imperfections,
has, perhaps, contributed more, both to the plentiful supply of

them only in order to show of how much less consequence, in the
opinion of the most judicious and experienced persons, the for-

the home market, and to the increase of tillage, than any other law
in the statute book. It is from this law that the inland corn trade

eign trade of corn is than the home trade. The great cheapness of
corn in the years immediately preceding the establishment of the

has derived all the liberty and protection which it has ever yet
enjoyed; and both the supply of the home market and the interest

bounty may, perhaps with reason, he ascribed in some measure to
the operation of this statute of Charles II. which had been enacted

of tillage are much more effectually promoted by the inland, than
either by the importation or exportation trade.

about five-and-twenty years before, and which had, therefore, full
time to produce its effect.

The proportion of the average quantity of all sorts of grain imported into Great Britain to that of all sorts of grain consumed, it

A very few words will sufficiently explain all that I have to say
concerning the other three branches of the corn trade.

has been computed by the author of the Tracts upon the Corn
Trade, does not exceed that of one to five hundred and seventy.

II. The trade of the merchant-importer of foreign corn for home
consumption, evidently contributes to the immediate supply of

For supplying the home market, therefore, the importance of the
inland trade must be to that of the importation trade as five hun-

the home market, and must so far be immediately beneficial to
the great body of the people. It tends, indeed, to lower somewhat

dred and seventy to one.
The average quantity of all sorts of grain exported from Great

the average money price of corn, but not to diminish its real value,
or the quantity of labour which it is capable of maintaining. If

Britain does not, according to the same author, exceed the oneand-thirtieth part of the annual produce. For the encouragement

importation was at all times free, our farmers and country gentlemen would probably, one year with another, get less money for

of tillage, therefore, by providing a market for the home produce,
the importance of the inland trade must be to that of the exporta-

their corn than they do at present, when importation is at most
times in effect prohibited; but the money which they got would

tion trade as thirty to one.
I have no great faith in political arithmetic, and I mean not to

be of more value, would buy more goods of all other kinds, and
would employ more labour. Their real wealth, their real revenue,

warrant the exactness of either of these computations. I mention

therefore, would be the same as at present, though it might be

430

Adam Smith
expressed by a smaller quantity of silver, and they would neither
be disabled nor discouraged from cultivating corn as much as they

of very great scarcity; and the latter has, so far as I know, not taken
place at all. Yet, till wheat has risen above this latter price, it was,

do at present. On the contrary, as the rise in the real value of silver,
in consequence of lowering the money price of corn, lowers some-

by this statute, subjected to a very high duty; and, till it had risen
above the former, to a duty which amounted to a prohibition.

what the money price of all other commodities, it gives the industry of the country where it takes place some advantage in all for-

The importation of other sorts of grain was restrained at rates and
by duties, in proportion to the value of the grain, almost equally

eign markets and thereby tends to encourage and increase that
industry. But the extent of the home market for corn must be in

high. Before the 13th of the present king, the following were the
duties payable upon the importation of the different sorts of grain:

proportion to the general industry of the country where it grows,
or to the number of those who produce something else, and there-

Grain.

Duties.

Duties

Duties.

fore, have something else, or, what comes to the same thing, the
price of something else, to give in exchange for corn. But in every

Beans to 28s. per qr. 19s:10d. after till 40s. 16s:8d. then 12d.
Barley to 28s. - 19s:10d.
- 32s. 16s. - 12d.

country, the home market, as it is the nearest and most convenient, so is it likewise the greatest and most important market for

Malt is prohibited by the annual malt-tax bill.
Oats to 16s.
- 5s:10d. after -

corn. That rise in the real value of silver, therefore, which is the
effect of lowering the average money price of corn, tends to en-

Pease to 40s.
Rye to 36s.

-

16s: 0d. after 19s:10d. till 40s.

large the greatest and most important market for corn, and thereby
to encourage, instead of discouraging its growth.

Wheat to 44s.

-

21s: 9d. till 53s:4d. 17s.
till £4, and after that about

By the 22d of Charles II. c. 13, the importation of wheat, whenever the price in the home market did not exceed 53s:4d. the quar-

Buck-wheat to 32s. per qr.

ter, was subjected to a duty of 16s. the quarter; and to a duty of 8s.
whenever the price did not exceed £4. The former of these two

These different duties were imposed, partly by the 22d of Charles
II. in place of the old subsidy, partly by the new subsidy, by the

prices has, for more than a century past, taken place only in times

one-third and two-thirds subsidy, and by the subsidy 1747. Sub-

431

9½d.

9¾d.
16s:8d - 12d.
- 8s.
1s:4d.

to pay 16s.

The Wealth of Nations
sequent laws still further increased those duties.
The distress which, in years of scarcity, the strict execution of

whatever source this supply maybe usually drawn, whether from
home growth, or from foreign importation, unless more corn is

those laws might have brought upon the people, would probably
have been very great; but, upon such occasions, its execution was

either usually grown, or usually imported into the country, than
what is usually consumed in it, the supply of the home market

generally suspended by temporary statutes, which permitted, for
a limited time, the importation of foreign corn. The necessity of

can never be very plentiful. But unless the surplus can, in all ordinary cases, be exported, the growers will be careful never to grow

these temporary statutes sufficiently demonstrates the impropriety of this general one.

more, and the importers never to import more, than what the
bare consumption of the home market requires. That market will

These restraints upon importation, though prior to the establishment of the bounty, were dictated by the same spirit, by the

very seldom be overstocked; but it will generally be understocked;
the people, whose business it is to supply it, being generally afraid

same principles, which afterwards enacted that regulation. How
hurtful soever in themselves, these, or some other restraints upon

lest their goods should be left upon their hands. The prohibition
of exportation limits the improvement and cultivation of the coun-

importation, became necessary in consequence of that regulation.
If, when wheat was either below 48s. the quarter, or not much

try to what the supply of its own inhabitants require. The freedom
of exportation enables it to extend cultivation for the supply of

above it, foreign corn could have been imported, either duty free,
or upon paying only a small duty, it might have been exported

foreign nations.
By the 12th of Charles II. c.4, the exportation of corn was per-

again, with the benefit of the bounty, to the great loss of the public revenue, and to the entire perversion of the institution, of which

mitted whenever the price of wheat did not exceed 40s. the quarter, and that of other grain in proportion. By the 15th of the same

the object was to extend the market for the home growth, not that
for the growth of foreign countries.

prince, this liberty was extended till the price of wheat exceeded
48s. the quarter; and by the 22d, to all higher prices. A poundage,

III. The trade of the merchant-exporter of corn for foreign consumption, certainly does not contribute directly to the plentiful

indeed, was to be paid to the king upon such exportation; but all
grain was rated so low in the book of rates, that this poundage

supply of the home market. It does so, however, indirectly. From

amounted only, upon wheat to 1s., upon oats to 4d., and upon all

432

Adam Smith
other grain to 6d. the quarter. By the 1st of William and Mary, the
act which established this bounty, this small duty was virtually

home growth; and by the encouragement of exportation, when
the price was so high as 48s. the quarter, that market was not,

taken off whenever the price of wheat did not exceed 48s. the
quarter; and by the 11th and 12th of William III. c. 20, it was

even in times of considerable scarcity, allowed to enjoy the whole
of that growth. The temporary laws, prohibiting, for a limited

expressly taken off at all higher prices.
The trade of the merchant-exporter was, in this manner, not

time, the exportation of corn, and taking off, for a limited time,
the duties upon its importation, expedients to which Great Brit-

only encouraged by a bounty, but rendered much more free than
that of the inland dealer. By the last of these statutes, corn could

ain has been obliged so frequently to have recourse, sufficiently
demonstrate the impropriety of her general system. Had that sys-

be engrossed at any price for exportation; but it could not be engrossed for inland sale, except when the price did not exceed 48s.

tem been good, she would not so frequently have been reduced to
the necessity of departing from it.

the quarter. The interest of the inland dealer, however, it has already been shown, can never be opposite to that of the great body

Were all nations to follow the liberal system of free exportation
and free importation, the different states into which a great conti-

of the people. That of the merchant-exporter may, and in fact
sometimes is. If, while his own country labours under a dearth, a

nent was divided, would so far resemble the different provinces of
a great empire. As among the different provinces of a great em-

neighbouring country should be afflicted with a famine, it might
be his interest to carry corn to the latter country, in such quanti-

pire, the freedom of the inland trade appears, both from reason
and experience, not only the best palliative of a dearth, but the

ties as might very much aggravate the calamities of the dearth.
The plentiful supply of the home market was not the direct object

most effectual preventive of a famine; so would the freedom of the
exportation and importation trade be among the different states

of those statutes; but, under the pretence of encouraging agriculture, to raise the money price of corn as high as possible, and

into which a great continent was divided. The larger the continent, the easier the communication through all the different parts

thereby to occasion, as much as possible, a constant dearth in the
home market. By the discouragement of importation, the supply

of it, both by land and by water, the less would any one particular
part of it ever be exposed to either of these calamities, the scarcity

of that market; even in times of great scarcity, was confined to the

of any one country being more likely to be relieved by the plenty

433

The Wealth of Nations
of some other. But very few countries have entirely adopted this
liberal system. The freedom of the corn trade is almost everywhere

doned only, in cases of the most urgent necessity. The price at
which exportation of corn is prohibited, if it is ever to be prohib-

more or less restrained, and in many countries is confined by such
absurd regulations, as frequently aggravate the unavoidable mis-

ited, ought always to be a very high price.
The laws concerning corn may everywhere be compared to the

fortune of a dearth into the dreadful calamity of a famine. The
demand of such countries for corn may frequently become so great

laws concerning religion. The people feel themselves so much interested in what relates either to their subsistence in this life, or to

and so urgent, that a small state in their neighbourhood, which
happened at the same time to be labouring under some degree of

their happiness in a life to come, that government must yield to
their prejudices, and, in order to preserve the public tranquillity,

dearth, could not venture to supply them without exposing itself
to the like dreadful calamity. The very bad policy of one country

establish that system which they approve of. It is upon this account, perhaps, that we so seldom find a reasonable system estab-

may thus render it, in some measure, dangerous and imprudent
to establish what would otherwise be the best policy in another.

lished with regard to either of those two capital objects.
IV. The trade of the merchant-carrier, or of the importer of for-

The unlimited freedom of exportation, however, would be much
less dangerous in great states, in which the growth being much

eign corn, in order to export it again, contributes to the plentiful
supply of the home market. It is not, indeed, the direct purpose of

greater, the supply could seldom be much affected by any quantity or corn that was likely to be exported. In a Swiss canton, or in

his trade to sell his corn there; but he will generally be willing to
do so, and even for a good deal less money than he might expect

some of the little states in Italy, it may, perhaps, sometimes be
necessary to restrain the exportation of corn. In such great coun-

in a foreign market; because he saves in this manner the expense
of loading and unloading, of freight and insurance. The inhabit-

tries as France or England, it scarce ever can. To hinder, besides,
the farmer from sending his goods at all times to the best market,

ants of the country which, by means of the carrying trade, becomes the magazine and storehouse for the supply of other coun-

is evidently to sacrifice the ordinary laws of justice to an idea of
public utility, to a sort of reasons of state; an act or legislative

tries, can very seldom be in want themselves. Though the carrying
trade must thus contribute to reduce the average money price of

authority which ought to be exercised only, which can be par-

corn in the home market, it would not thereby lower its real value;

434

Adam Smith
it would only raise somewhat the real value of silver.
The carrying trade was in effect prohibited in Great Britain,

structions, with which the folly of human laws too often encumbers its operations: though the effect of those obstructions is al-

upon all ordinary occasions, by the high duties upon the importation of foreign corn, of the greater part of which there was no

ways, more or less, either to encroach upon its freedom, or to
diminish its security. In Great Britain industry is perfectly secure;

drawback; and upon extraordinary occasions, when a scarcity made
it necessary to suspend those duties by temporary statutes, expor-

and though it is far from being perfectly free, it is as free or freer
than in any other part of Europe.

tation was always prohibited. By this system of laws, therefore, the
carrying trade was in effect prohibited.

Though the period of the greatest prosperity and improvement of
Great Britain has been posterior to that system of laws which is con-

That system of laws, therefore, which is connected with the establishment of the bounty, seems to deserve no part of the praise

nected with the bounty, we must not upon that account, impute it to
those laws. It has been posterior likewise to the national debt; but the

which has been bestowed upon it. The improvement and prosperity of Great Britain, which has been so often ascribed to those

national debt has most assuredly not been the cause of it.
Though the system of laws which is connected with the bounty,

laws, may very easily be accounted for by other causes. That security which the laws in Great Britain give to every man, that he

has exactly the same tendency with the practice of Spain and Portugal, to lower somewhat the value of the precious metals in the

shall enjoy the fruits of his own labour, is alone sufficient to make
any country flourish, notwithstanding these and twenty other

country where it takes place; yet Great Britain is certainly one of
the richest countries in Europe, while Spain and Portugal are per-

absurd regulations of commerce; and this security was perfected
by the Revolution, much about the same time that the bounty

haps amongst the most beggarly. This difference of situation, however, may easily be accounted for from two different causes. First,

was established. The natural effort of every individual to better his
own condition, when suffered to exert itself with freedom and

the tax in Spain, the prohibition in Portugal of exporting gold and
silver, and the vigilant police which watches over the execution of

security, is so powerful a principle, that it is alone, and without
any assistance, not only capable of carrying on the society to wealth

those laws, must, in two very poor countries, which between them
import annually upwards of six millions sterling, operate not only

and prosperity, but of surmounting a hundred impertinent ob-

more directly, but much more forcibly, in reducing the value of

435

The Wealth of Nations
those metals there, than the corn laws can do in Great Britain.
And, secondly, this bad policy is not in those countries counter-

stead of 48s. the price at which it ceased before; that of 2s:6d.
upon the exportation of barley, ceases so soon as the price rises to

balanced by the general liberty and security of the people. Industry is there neither free nor secure; and the civil and ecclesiastical

22s. instead of 24s. the price at which it ceased before; that of
2s:6d. upon the exportation of oatmeal, ceases so soon as the price

governments of both Spain and Portugal are such as would alone
be sufficient to perpetuate their present state of poverty, even

rises to 14s. instead of 15s. the price at which it ceased before. The
bounty upon rye is reduced from 3s:6d. to 3s. and it ceases so

though their regulations of commerce were as wise as the greatest
part of them are absurd and foolish.

soon as the price rises to 28s. instead of 32s. the price at which it
ceased before. If bounties are as improper as I have endeavoured

The 13th of the present king, c. 43, seems to have established a
new system with regard to the corn laws, in many respects better

to prove them to be, the sooner they cease, and the lower they are,
so much the better.

than the ancient one, but in one or two respects perhaps not quite
so good.

The same statute permits, at the lowest prices, the importation
of corn in order to be exported again, duty free, provided it is in

By this statute, the high duties upon importation for home consumption are taken off, so soon as the price of middling wheat

the mean time lodged in a warehouse under the joint locks of the
king and the importer. This liberty, indeed, extends to no more

rises to 48s. the quarter; that of middling rye, pease, or beans, to
32s.; that of barley to 24s.; and that of oats to 16s.; and instead of

than twenty-five of the different ports of Great Britain. They are,
however, the principal ones; and there may not, perhaps, be ware-

them, a small duty is imposed of only 6d upon the quarter of
wheat, and upon that or other grain in proportion. With regard to

houses proper for this purpose in the greater part of the others.
So far this law seems evidently an improvement upon the an-

all those different sorts of grain, but particularly with regard to
wheat, the home market is thus opened to foreign supplies, at

cient system.
But by the same law, a bounty of 2s. the quarter is given for the

prices considerably lower than before.
By the same statute, the old bounty of 5s. upon the exportation

exportation of oats, whenever the price does not exceed fourteen
shillings. No bounty had ever been given before for the exporta-

of wheat, ceases so soon as the price rises to 44s. the quarter, in-

tion of this grain, no more than for that of pease or beans.

436

Adam Smith
By the same law, too, the exportation of wheat is prohibited so
soon as the price rises to forty-four shillings the quarter; that of

CHAPTER VI

rye so soon as it rises to twenty-eight shillings; that of barley so
soon as it rises to twenty-two shillings; and that of oats so soon as

OF TREATIES OF COMMERCE

they rise to fourteen shillings. Those several prices seem all of them
a good deal too low; and there seems to be an impropriety, be-

WHEN A NATION BINDS ITSELF by treaty, either to permit the entry
of certain goods from one foreign country which it prohibits from

sides, in prohibiting exportation altogether at those precise prices
at which that bounty, which was given in order to force it, is with-

all others, or to exempt the goods of one country from duties to
which it subjects those of all others, the country, or at least the

drawn. The bounty ought certainly either to have been withdrawn
at a much lower price, or exportation ought to have been allowed

merchants and manufacturers of the country, whose commerce is
so favoured, must necessarily derive great advantage from the treaty.

at a much higher.
So far, therefore, this law seems to be inferior to the ancient

Those merchants and manufacturers enjoy a sort of monopoly in
the country which is so indulgent to them. That country becomes

system. With all its imperfections, however, we may perhaps say
of it what was said of the laws of Solon, that though not the best

a market, both more extensive and more advantageous for their
goods: more extensive, because the goods of other nations being

in itself, it is the best which the interest, prejudices, and temper of
the times, would admit of. It may perhaps in due time prepare the

either excluded or subjected to heavier duties, it takes off a greater
quantity of theirs; more advantageous, because the merchants of

way for a better.

the favoured country, enjoying a sort of monopoly there, will often sell their goods for a better price than if exposed to the free
competition of all other nations.
Such treaties, however, though they may be advantageous to the
merchants and manufacturers of the favoured, are necessarily disadvantageous to those of the favouring country. A monopoly is
thus granted against them to a foreign nation; and they must fre-

437

The Wealth of Nations
quently buy the foreign goods they have occasion for, dearer than
if the free competition of other nations was admitted. That part of

silver would be annually returned to it. It is upon this principle
that the treaty of commerce between England and Portugal, con-

its own produce with which such a nation purchases foreign goods,
must consequently be sold cheaper; because, when two things are

cluded in 1703 by Mr Methuen, has been so much commended.
The following is a literal translation of that treaty, which consists

exchanged for one another, the cheapness of the one is a necessary
consequence, or rather is the same thing, with the dearness of the

of three articles only.

other. The exchangeable value of its annual produce, therefore, is
likely to be diminished by every such treaty. This diminution,

ART. I.

however, can scarce amount to any positive loss, but only to a
lessening of the gain which it might otherwise make. Though it

His sacred royal majesty of Portugal promises, both in his own
name and that of his successors, to admit for ever hereafter, into

sells its goods cheaper than it otherwise might do, it will not probably sell them for less than they cost; nor, as in the case of boun-

Portugal, the woollen cloths, and the rest of the woollen manufactures of the British, as was accustomed, till they were prohibited

ties, for a price which will not replace the capital employed in
bringing them to market, together with the ordinary profits of

by the law; nevertheless upon this condition:

stock. The trade could not go on long if it did. Even the favouring
country, therefore, may still gain by the trade, though less than if

ART. II.

there was a free competition.
Some treaties of commerce, however, have been supposed ad-

That is to say, that her sacred royal majesty of Great Britain shall,
in her own name, and that of her successors, be obliged, for ever

vantageous, upon principles very different from these; and a commercial country has sometimes granted a monopoly of this kind,

hereafter, to admit the wines of the growth of Portugal into Britain; so that at no time, whether there shall be peace or war be-

against itself, to certain goods of a foreign nation, because it expected, that in the whole commerce between them, it would an-

tween the kingdoms of Britain and France, any thing more shall
be demanded for these wines by the name of custom or duty, or

nually sell more than it would buy, and that a balance in gold and

by whatsoever other title, directly or indirectly, whether they shall

438

Adam Smith
be imported into Great Britain in pipes or hogsheads, or other
casks, than what shall be demanded for the like quantity or mea-

most likely to come into competition with them. So far this treaty,
therefore, is evidently advantageous to Portugal, and disadvanta-

sure of French wine, deducting or abating a third part of the custom or duty. But if, at any time, this deduction or abatement of

geous to Great Britain.
It has been celebrated, however, as a masterpiece of the com-

customs, which is to be made as aforesaid, shall in any manner be
attempted and prejudiced, it shall be just and lawful for his sacred

mercial policy of England. Portugal receives annually from the
Brazils a greater quantity of gold than can be employed in its do-

royal majesty of Portugal, again to prohibit the woollen cloths,
and the rest of the British woollen manufactures.

mestic commerce, whether in the shape of coin or of plate. The
surplus is too valuable to be allowed to lie idle and locked up in

ART. III.

coffers; and as it can find no advantageous market at home, it
must, notwithstanding; any prohibition, be sent abroad, and ex-

The most excellent lords the plenipotentiaries promise and take

changed for something for which there is a more advantageous
market at home. A large share of it comes annually to England, in

upon themselves, that their above named masters shall ratify this
treaty; and within the space of two months the ratification shall

return either for English goods, or for those of other European
nations that receive their returns through England. Mr Barretti

be exchanged.
By this treaty, the crown of Portugal becomes bound to admit

was informed, that the weekly packet-boat from Lisbon brings,
one week with another, more than £50,000 in gold to England.

the English woollens upon the same footing as before the prohibition; that is, not to raise the duties which had been paid before

The sum had probably been exaggerated. It would amount to more
than £2,600,000 a year, which is more than the Brazils are sup-

that time. But it does not become bound to admit them upon any
better terms than those of any other nation, of France or Holland,

posed to afford.
Our merchants were, some years ago, out of humour with the

for example. The crown of Great Britain, on the contrary, becomes bound to admit the wines of Portugal, upon paying only

crown of Portugal. Some privileges which had been granted them,
not by treaty, but by the free grace of that crown, at the solicita-

two-thirds of the duty which is paid for those of France, the wines

tion, indeed, it is probable, and in return for much greater favours,

439

The Wealth of Nations
defence and protection from the crown of Great Britain, had been
either infringed or revoked. The people, therefore, usually most

advantageous than a round-about one; and to bring the same value
of foreign goods to the home market requires a much smaller capital

interested in celebrating the Portugal trade, were then rather disposed to represent it as less advantageous than it had commonly

in the one way than in the ether. If a smaller share of its industry,
therefore, had been employed in producing goods fit for the Por-

been imagined. The far greater part, almost the whole, they pretended, of this annual importation of gold, was not on account of

tugal market, and a greater in producing those lit for the other
markets, where those consumable goods for which there is a de-

Great Britain, but of other European nations; the fruits and wines
of Portugal annually imported into Great Britain nearly compen-

mand in Great Britain are to be had, it would have been more for
the advantage of England. To procure both the gold which it wants

sating the value of the British goods sent thither.
Let us suppose, however, that the whole was on account of Great

for its own use, and the consumable goods, would, in this way,
employ a much smaller capital than at present. There would be a

Britain, and that it amounted to a still greater sum than Mr Barretti
seems to imagine; this trade would not, upon that account, be more

spare capital, therefore, to be employed for other purposes, in exciting an additional quantity of industry, and in raising a greater

advantageous than any other, in which, for the same value sent out,
we received an equal value of consumable goods in return.

annual produce.
Though Britain were entirely excluded from the Portugal trade,

It is but a very small part of this importation which, it can be
supposed, is employed as an annual addition, either to the plate or

it could find very little difficulty in procuring all the annual supplies of gold which it wants, either for the purposes of plate, or of

to the coin of the kingdom. The rest must all be sent abroad, and
exchanged for consumable goods of some kind or other. But if

coin, or of foreign trade. Gold, like every other commodity, is
always somewhere or another to be got for its value by those who

those consumable goods were purchased directly with the produce of English industry, it would be more for the advantage of

have that value to give for it. The annual surplus of gold in Portugal, besides, would still be sent abroad, and though not carried

England, than first to purchase with that produce the gold of Portugal, and afterwards to purchase with that gold those consum-

away by Great Britain, would be carried away by some other nation, which would be glad to sell it again for its price, in the same

able goods. A direct foreign trade of consumption is always more

manner as Great Britain does at present. In buying gold of Portu-

440

Adam Smith
gal, indeed, we buy it at the first hand; whereas, in buying it of
any other nation, except Spain, we should buy it at the second,

receive into them French or Spanish garrisons. Had the king of
Portugal submitted to those ignominious terms which his brother-

and might pay somewhat dearer. This difference, however, would
surely be too insignificant to deserve the public attention.

in-law the king of Spain proposed to him, Britain would have
been freed from a much greater inconveniency than the loss of the

Almost all our gold, it is said, comes from Portugal. With other
nations, the balance of trade is either against as, or not much in our

Portugal trade, the burden of supporting a very weak ally, so unprovided of every thing for his own defence, that the whole power

favour. But we should remember, that the more gold we import
from one country, the less we must necessarily import from all oth-

of England, had it been directed to that single purpose, could
scarce, perhaps, have defended him for another campaign. The

ers. The effectual demand for gold, like that for every other commodity, is in every country limited to a certain quantity. If nine-

loss of the Portugal trade would, no doubt, have occasioned a
considerable embarrassment to the merchants at that time engaged

tenths of this quantity are imported from one country, there remains a tenth only to be imported from all others. The more gold,

in it, who might not, perhaps, have found out, for a year or two,
any other equally advantageous method of employing their capi-

besides, that is annually imported from some particular countries,
over and above what is requisite for plate and for coin, the more

tals; and in this would probably have consisted all the inconveniency which England could have suffered from this notable piece

must necessarily be exported to some others: and the more that
most insignificant object of modern policy, the balance of trade,

of commercial policy.
The great annual importation of gold and silver is neither for

appears to be in our favour with some particular countries, the more
it must necessarily appear to be against us with many others.

the purpose of plate nor of coin, but of foreign trade. A roundabout foreign trade of consumption can be carried on more ad-

It was upon this silly notion, however, that England could not
subsist without the Portugal trade, that, towards the end of the

vantageously by means of these metals than of almost any other
goods. As they are the universal instruments of commerce, they

late war, France and Spain, without pretending either offence or
provocation, required the king of Portugal to exclude all British

are more readily received in return for all commodities than any
other goods; and, on account of their small bulk and great value,

ships from his ports, and, for the security of this exclusion, to

it costs less to transport them backward and forward from one

441

The Wealth of Nations
place to another than almost any other sort of merchandize, and
they lose less of their value by being so transported. Of all the

upwards of £800,000 a-year in gold, was an annual addition to
the money before current in the kingdom. In a country where the

commodities, therefore, which are bought in one foreign country,
for no other purpose but to be sold or exchanged again for some

expense of the coinage is defrayed by the government, the value of
the coin, even when it contains its full standard weight of gold

other goods in another, there are none so convenient as gold and
silver. In facilitating all the different round-about foreign trades of

and silver, can never be much greater than that of an equal quantity of those metals uncoined, because it requires only the trouble

consumption which are carried on in Great Britain, consists the
principal advantage of the Portugal trade; and though it is not a

of going to the mint, and the delay, perhaps, of a few weeks, to
procure for any quantity of uncoined gold and silver an equal

capital advantage, it is, no doubt, a considerable one.
That any annual addition which, it can reasonably be supposed,

quantity of those metals in coin; but in every country the greater
part of the current coin is almost always more or less worn, or

is made either to the plate or to the coin of the kingdom, could
require but a very small annual importation of gold and silver,

otherwise degenerated from its standard. In Great Britain it was,
before the late reformation, a good deal so, the gold being more

seems evident enough; and though we had no direct trade with
Portugal, this small quantity could always, somewhere or another,

than two per cent., and the silver more than eight per cent. below
its standard weight. But if forty-four guineas and a-half, contain-

be very easily got.
Though the goldsmiths trade be very considerable in Great Brit-

ing their full standard weight, a pound weight of gold, could purchase very little more than a pound weight of uncoined gold; forty-

ain, the far greater part of the new plate which they annually sell,
is made from other old plate melted down; so that the addition

four guineas and a-half, wanting a part of their weight, could not
purchase a pound weight, and something was to be added, in or-

annually made to the whole plate of the kingdom cannot be very
great, and could require but a very small annual importation.

der to make up the deficiency. The current price of gold bullion at
market, therefore, instead of being the same with the mint price,

It is the same case with the coin. Nobody imagines, I believe,
that even the greater part of the annual coinage, amounting, for

or £46:14:6, was then about £47:14s., and sometimes about £48.
When the greater part of the coin, however, was in this degenerate

ten years together, before the late reformation of the gold coin, to

condition, forty four guineas and a-half, fresh from the mint, would

442

Adam Smith
purchase no more goods in the market than any other ordinary
guineas; because, when they came into the coffers of the mer-

having everywhere the exclusive privilege of coining, no coin can
come to market cheaper than they think proper to afford it. If the

chant, being confounded with other money, they could not afterwards be distinguished without more trouble than the difference

duty was exorbitant, indeed, that is, if it was very much above the
real value of the labour and expense requisite for coinage, false

was worth. Like other guineas, they were worth no more than
£46:14:6. If thrown into the melting pot, however, they produced,

coiners, both at home and abroad, might be encouraged, by the
great difference between the value of bullion and that of coin, to

without any sensible loss, a pound weight of standard gold, which
could be sold at any time for between £47:14s. and £48, either in

pour in so great a quantity of counterfeit money as might reduce
the value of the government money. In France, however, though

gold or silver, as fit for all the purposes of coin as that which had
been melted down. There was an evident profit, therefore, in melt-

the seignorage is eight per cent., no sensible inconveniency of this
kind is found to arise from it. The dangers to which a false coiner

ing down new-coined money; and it was done so instantaneously,
that no precaution of government could prevent it. The opera-

is everywhere exposed, if he lives in the country of which he counterfeits the coin, and to which his agents or correspondents are

tions of the mint were, upon this account, somewhat like the web
of Penelope; the work that was done in the day was undone in the

exposed, if he lives in a foreign country, are by far too great to be
incurred for the sake of a profit of six or seven per cent.

night. The mint was employed, not so much in making daily additions to the coin, as in replacing the very best part of it, which

The seignorage in France raises the value of the coin higher than
in proportion to the quantity of pure gold which it contains. Thus,

was daily melted down.
Were the private people who carry their gold and silver to the

by the edict of January 1726, the mint price of fine gold of twentyfour carats was fixed at seven hundred and forty livres nine sous

mint to pay themselves for the coinage, it would add to the value
of those metals, in the same manner as the fashion does to that of

and one denier one-eleventh the mark of eight Paris ounces. {See
Dictionnaire des Monnoies, tom. ii. article Seigneurage, p. 439,

plate. Coined gold and silver would be more valuable than
uncoined. The seignorage, if it was not exorbitant, would add to

par 81. Abbot de Bazinghen, Conseiller-Commissaire en la Cour
des Monnoies à Paris.} The gold coin of France, making an allow-

the bullion the whole value of the duty; because, the government

ance for the remedy of the mint, contains twenty-one carats and

443

The Wealth of Nations
three-fourths of fine gold, and two carats one-fourth of alloy. The
mark of standard gold, therefore, is worth no more than about six

profit but of one per cent. only, instead of two per cent. Wherever
money is received by tale, therefore, and not by weight, a seignor-

hundred and seventy-one livres ten deniers. But in France this
mark of standard gold is coined into thirty louis d’ors of twenty-

age is the most effectual preventive of the melting down of the
coin, and, for the same reason, of its exportation. It is the best and

four livres each, or into seven hundred and twenty livres. The
coinage, therefore, increases the value of a mark of standard gold

heaviest pieces that are commonly either melted down or exported,
because it is upon such that the largest profits are made.

bullion, by the difference between six hundred and seventy-one
livres ten deniers and seven hundred and twenty livres, or by forty-

The law for the encouragement of the coinage, by rendering it
duty-free, was first enacted during the reign of Charles II. for a

eight livres nineteen sous and two deniers.
A seignorage will, in many cases, take away altogether, and will

limited time, and afterwards continued, by different prolongations, till 1769, when it was rendered perpetual. The bank of En-

in all cases diminish, the profit of melting down the new coin.
This profit always arises from the difference between the quantity

gland, in order to replenish their coffers with money, are frequently
obliged to carry bullion to the mint; and it was more for their

of bullion which the common currency ought to contain and that
which it actually does contain. If this difference is less than the

interest, they probably imagined, that the coinage should be at
the expense of the government than at their own. It was probably

seignorage, there will be loss instead of profit. If it is equal to the
seignorage, there will be neither profit nor loss. If it is greater than

out of complaisance to this great company, that the government
agreed to render this law perpetual. Should the custom of weigh-

the seignorage, there will, indeed, be some profit, but less than if
there was no seignorage. If, before the late reformation of the gold

ing gold, however, come to be disused, as it is very likely to be on
account of its inconveniency; should the gold coin of England

coin, for example, there had been a seignorage of five per cent.
upon the coinage, there would have been a loss of three per cent.

come to be received by tale, as it was before the late recoinage this
great company may, perhaps, find that they have, upon this, as

upon the melting down of the gold coin. If the seignorage had
been two per cent., there would have been neither profit nor loss.

upon some other occasions, mistaken their own interest not a little.
Before the late recoinage, when the gold currency of England

If the seignorage had been one per cent., there would have been a

was two per cent. below its standard weight, as there was no sei-

444

Adam Smith
gnorage, it was two per cent. below the value of that quantity of
standard gold bullion which it ought to have contained. When

pay, their loss upon the whole transaction would have been exactly
two per cent., in the same manner as in all other cases.

this great company, therefore, bought gold bullion in order to
have it coined, they were obliged to pay for it two per cent. more

If there was a reasonable seignorage, while at the same time the
coin contained its full standard weight, as it has done very nearly

than it was worth after the coinage. But if there had been a seignorage of two per cent. upon the coinage, the common gold currency,

since the late recoinage, whatever the bank might lose by the seignorage, they would gain upon the price of the bullion; and what-

though two per cent. below its standard weight, would, notwithstanding, have been equal in value to the quantity of standard gold

ever they might gain upon the price of the bullion, they would
lose by the seignorage. They would neither lose nor gain, there-

which it ought to have contained; the value of the fashion compensating in this case the diminution of the weight. They would, in-

fore, upon the whole transaction, and they would in this, as in all
the foregoing cases, be exactly in the same situation as if there was

deed, have had the seignorage to pay, which being two per cent.,
their loss upon the whole transaction would have been two per cent.,

no seignorage.
When the tax upon a commodity is so moderate as not to en-

exactly the same, but no greater than it actually was.
If the seignorage had been five per cent. and the gold currency

courage smuggling, the merchant who deals in it, though he advances, does not properly pay the tax, as he gets it back in the

only two per cent. below its standard weight, the bank would, in
this case, have gained three per cent. upon the price of the bullion;

price of the commodity. The tax is finally paid by the last purchaser or consumer. But money is a commodity, with regard to

but as they would have had a seignorage of five per cent. to pay
upon the coinage, their loss upon the whole transaction would, in

which every man is a merchant. Nobody buys it but in order to
sell it again; and with regard to it there is, in ordinary cases, no last

the same manner, have been exactly two per cent.
If the seignorage had been only one per cent., and the gold cur-

purchaser or consumer. When the tax upon coinage, therefore, is
so moderate as not to encourage false coining, though every body

rency two per cent. below its standard weight, the bank would, in
this case, have lost only one per cent. upon the price of the bullion;

advances the tax, nobody finally pays it; because every body gets it
back in the advanced value of the coin.

but as they would likewise have had a seignorage of one per cent. to

A moderate seignorage, therefore, would not, in any case, aug-

445

The Wealth of Nations
ment the expense of the bank, or of any other private persons who
carry their bullion to the mint in order to be coined; and the want

position of a seignorage, would probably be very considerable.
The bank of England is the only company which sends any con-

of a moderate seignorage does not in any case diminish it. Whether
there is or is not a seignorage, if the currency contains its full

siderable quantity of bullion to the mint, and the burden of the
annual coinage falls entirely, or almost entirely, upon it. If this

standard weight, the coinage costs nothing to anybody; and if it is
short of that weight, the coinage must always cost the difference

annual coinage had nothing to do but to repair the unavoidable
losses and necessary wear and tear of the coin, it could seldom

between the quantity of bullion which ought to be contained in
it, and that which actually is contained in it.

exceed fifty thousand, or at most a hundred thousand pounds.
But when the coin is degraded below its standard weight, the an-

The government, therefore, when it defrays the expense of coinage, not only incurs some small expense, but loses some small

nual coinage must, besides this, fill up the large vacuities which
exportation and the melting pot are continually making in the

revenue which it might get by a proper duty; and neither the bank,
nor any other private persons, are in the smallest degree benefited

current coin. It was upon this account, that during the ten or
twelve years immediately preceding the late reformation of the

by this useless piece of public generosity.
The directors of the bank, however, would probably be unwill-

gold coin, the annual coinage amounted, at an average, to more
than £850,000. But if there had been a seignorage of four or five

ing to agree to the imposition of a seignorage upon the authority
of a speculation which promises them no gain, but only pretends

per cent. upon the gold coin, it would probably, even in the state
in which things then were, have put an effectual stop to the busi-

to insure them from any loss. In the present state of the gold coin,
and as long as it continues to be received by weight, they certainly

ness both of exportation and of the melting pot. The bank, instead of losing every year about two and a half per cent. upon the

would gain nothing by such a change. But if the custom of weighing the gold coin should ever go into disuse, as it is very likely to

bullion which was to be coined into more than eight hundred and
fifty thousand pounds, or incurring an annual loss of more than

do, and if the gold coin should ever fall into the same state of
degradation in which it was before the late recoinage, the gain, or

£21,250 pounds, would not probably have incurred the tenth part
of that loss.

more properly the savings, of the bank, inconsequence of the im-

The revenue allotted by parliament for defraying the expense of

446

Adam Smith
the coinage is but fourteen thousand pounds a-year; and the real
expense which it costs the government, or the fees of the officers

CHAPTER VII

of the mint, do not, upon ordinary occasions, I am assured, exceed the half of that sum. The saving of so very small a sum, or

OF COLONIES

even the gaining of another, which could not well be much larger,
are objects too inconsiderable, it may be thought, to deserve the

PART I

serious attention of government. But the saving of eighteen or
twenty thousand pounds a-year, in case of an event which is not

Of the Motives for Establishing New Colonies

improbable, which has frequently happened before, and which is
very likely to happen again, is surely an object which well deserves

THE INTEREST which occasioned the first settlement of the different European colonies in America and the West Indies, was not

the serious attention, even of so great a company as the bank of
England.

altogether so plain and distinct as that which directed the establishment of those of ancient Greece and Rome.

Some of the foregoing reasonings and observations might, perhaps, have been more properly placed in those chapters of the first

All the different states of ancient Greece possessed, each of them,
but a very small territory; and when the people in anyone of them

book which treat of the origin and use of money, and of the difference between the real and the nominal price of commodities. But as

multiplied beyond what that territory could easily maintain, a part
of them were sent in quest of a new habitation, in some remote

the law for the encouragement of coinage derives its origin from
those vulgar prejudices which have been introduced by the mercan-

and distant part of the world; the warlike neighbours who surrounded them on all sides, rendering it difficult for any of them to

tile system, I judged it more proper to reserve them for this chapter.
Nothing could be more agreeable to the spirit of that system than a

enlarge very much its territory at home. The colonies of the Dorians
resorted chiefly to Italy and Sicily, which, in the times preceding

sort of bounty upon the production of money, the very thing which,
it supposes, constitutes the wealth of every nation. It is one of its

the foundation of Rome, were inhabited by barbarous and uncivilized nations; those of the Ionians and Aeolians, the two other

many admirable expedients for enriching the country.

great tribes of the Greeks, to Asia Minor and the islands of the

447

The Wealth of Nations
Aegean sea, of which the inhabitants sewn at that time to have
been pretty much in the same state as those of Sicily and Italy. The

ecuted upon one or two occasions, was either neglected or evaded,
and the inequality of fortunes went on continually increasing. The

mother city, though she considered the colony as a child, at all
times entitled to great favour and assistance, and owing in return

greater part of the citizens had no land; and without it the manners and customs of those times rendered it difficult for a freeman

much gratitude and respect, yet considered it as an emancipated
child, over whom she pretended to claim no direct authority or

to maintain his independency. In the present times, though a poor
man has no land of his own, if he has a little stock, he may either

jurisdiction. The colony settled its own form of government, enacted its own laws, elected its own magistrates, and made peace or

farm the lands of another, or he may carry on some little retail
trade; and if he has no stock, he may find employment either as a

war with its neighbours, as an independent state, which had no
occasion to wait for the approbation or consent of the mother

country labourer, or as an artificer. But among the ancient Romans, the lands of the rich were all cultivated by slaves, who

city. Nothing can be more plain and distinct than the interest
which directed every such establishment.

wrought under an overseer, who was likewise a slave; so that a
poor freeman had little chance of being employed either as a farmer

Rome, like most of the other ancient republics, was originally
founded upon an agrarian law, which divided the public territory,

or as a labourer. All trades and manufactures, too, even the retail
trade, were carried on by the slaves of the rich for the benefit of

in a certain proportion, among the different citizens who composed the state. The course of human affairs, by marriage, by suc-

their masters, whose wealth, authority, and protection, made it
difficult for a poor freeman to maintain the competition against

cession, and by alienation, necessarily deranged this original division, and frequently threw the lands which had been allotted for

them. The citizens, therefore, who had no land, had scarce any
other means of subsistence but the bounties of the candidates at

the maintenance of many different families, into the possession of
a single person. To remedy this disorder, for such it was supposed

the annual elections. The tribunes, when they had a mind to animate the people against the rich and the great, put them in mind

to be, a law was made, restricting the quantity of land which any
citizen could possess to five hundred jugera; about 350 English

of the ancient divisions of lands, and represented that law which
restricted this sort of private property as the fundamental law of

acres. This law, however, though we read of its having been ex-

the republic. The people became clamorous to get land, and the

448

Adam Smith
rich and the great, we may believe, were perfectly determined not
to give them any part of theirs. To satisfy them in some measure,

Roman colonies were, in many respects, different from the Greek
ones, the interest which prompted to establish them was equally

therefore, they frequently proposed to send out a new colony. But
conquering Rome was, even upon such occasions, under no ne-

plain and distinct. Both institutions derived their origin, either
from irresistible necessity, or from clear and evident utility.

cessity of turning out her citizens to seek their fortune, if one may
so, through the wide world, without knowing where they were to

The establishment of the European colonies in America and the
West Indies arose from no necessity; and though the utility which

settle. She assigned them lands generally in the conquered provinces of Italy, where, being within the dominions of the republic,

has resulted from them has been very great, it is not altogether so
clear and evident. It was not understood at their first establishment,

they could never form any independent state, but were at best but
a sort of corporation, which, though it had the power of enacting

and was not the motive, either of that establishment, or of the discoveries which gave occasion to it; and the nature, extent, and limits

bye-laws for its own government, was at all times subject to the
correction, jurisdiction, and legislative authority of the mother

of that utility, are not, perhaps, well understood at this day.
The Venetians, during the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries,

city. The sending out a colony of this kind not only gave some
satisfaction to the people, but often established a sort of garrison,

carried on a very advantageous commerce in spiceries and other
East India goods, which they distributed among the other nations

too, in a newly conquered province, of which the obedience might
otherwise have been doubtful. A Roman colony, therefore, whether

of Europe. They purchased them chiefly in Egypt, at that time
under the dominion of the Mamelukes, the enemies of the Turks,

we consider the nature of the establishment itself, or the motives
for making it, was altogether different from a Greek one. The

of whom the Venetians were the enemies; and this union of interest, assisted by the money of Venice, formed such a connexion as

words, accordingly, which in the original languages denote those
different establishments, have very different meanings. The Latin

gave the Venetians almost a monopoly of the trade.
The great profits of the Venetians tempted the avidity of the Por-

word (colonia) signifies simply a plantation. The Greek word
(apoixia), on the contrary, signifies a separation of dwelling, a de-

tuguese. They had been endeavouring, during the course of the fifteenth century, to find out by sea a way to the countries from which

parture from home, a going out of the house. But though the

the Moors brought them ivory and gold dust across the desert. They

449

The Wealth of Nations
discovered the Madeiras, the Canaries, the Azores, the Cape de Verd
islands, the coast of Guinea, that of Loango, Congo, Angola, and

the shortest and the surest, and he had the good fortune to convince Isabella of Castile of the probability of his project. He sailed

Benguela, and, finally, the Cape of Good Hope. They had long
wished to share in the profitable traffic of the Venetians, and this

from the port of Palos in August 1492, near five years before the
expedition of Vasco de Gamo set out from Portugal; and, after a

last discovery opened to them a probable prospect of doing so. In
1497, Vasco de Gamo sailed from the port of Lisbon with a fleet of

voyage of between two and three months, discovered first some of
the small Bahama or Lucyan islands, and afterwards the great is-

four ships, and, after a navigation of eleven months, arrived upon
the coast of Indostan; and thus completed a course of discoveries

land of St. Domingo.
But the countries which Columbus discovered, either in this or

which had been pursued with great steadiness, and with very little
interruption, for near a century together.

in any of his subsequent voyages, had no resemblance to those
which he had gone in quest of. Instead of the wealth, cultivation,

Some years before this, while the expectations of Europe were
in suspense about the projects of the Portuguese, of which the

and populousness of China and Indostan, he found, in St.
Domingo, and in all the other parts of the new world which he

success appeared yet to be doubtful, a Genoese pilot formed the
yet more daring project of sailing to the East Indies by the west.

ever visited, nothing but a country quite covered with wood, uncultivated, and inhabited only by some tribes of naked and miser-

The situation of those countries was at that time very imperfectly
known in Europe. The few European travellers who had been there,

able savages. He was not very willing, however, to believe that
they were not the same with some of the countries described by

had magnified the distance, perhaps through simplicity and ignorance; what was really very great, appearing almost infinite to those

Marco Polo, the first European who had visited, or at least had left
behind him any description of China or the East Indies; and a

who could not measure it; or, perhaps, in order to increase somewhat more the marvellous of their own adventures in visiting re-

very slight resemblance, such as that which he found between the
name of Cibao, a mountain in St. Domingo, and that of Cipange,

gions so immensely remote from Europe. The longer the way was
by the east, Columbus very justly concluded, the shorter it would

mentioned by Marco Polo, was frequently sufficient to make him
return to this favourite prepossession, though contrary to the

be by the west. He proposed, therefore, to take that way, as both

clearest evidence. In his letters to Ferdinand and Isabella, he called

450

Adam Smith
the countries which he had discovered the Indies. He entertained
no doubt but that they were the extremity of those which had

never to have been very numerous; and the dogs and cats of the
Spaniards are said to have long ago almost entirely extirpated it, as

been described by Marco Polo, and that they were not very distant
from the Ganges, or from the countries which had been conquered

well as some other tribes of a still smaller size. These, however,
together with a pretty large lizard, called the ivana or iguana, con-

by Alexander. Even when at last convinced that they were different, he still flattered himself that those rich countries were at no

stituted the principal part of the animal food which the land afforded.

great distance; and in a subsequent voyage, accordingly, went in
quest of them along the coast of Terra Firma, and towards the

The vegetable food of the inhabitants, though, from their want
of industry, not very abundant, was not altogether so scanty. It

Isthmus of Darien.
In consequence of this mistake of Columbus, the name of the

consisted in Indian corn, yams, potatoes, bananas, etc., plants
which were then altogether unknown in Europe, and which have

Indies has stuck to those unfortunate countries ever since; and
when it was at last clearly discovered that the new were altogether

never since been very much esteemed in it, or supposed to yield a
sustenance equal to what is drawn from the common sorts of grain

different from the old Indies, the former were called the West, in
contradistinction to the latter, which were called the East Indies.

and pulse, which have been cultivated in this part of the world
time out of mind.

It was of importance to Columbus, however, that the countries
which he had discovered, whatever they were, should be repre-

The cotton plant, indeed, afforded the material of a very important manufacture, and was at that time, to Europeans, un-

sented to the court of Spain as of very great consequence; and, in
what constitutes the real riches of every country, the animal and

doubtedly the most valuable of all the vegetable productions of
those islands. But though, in the end of the fifteenth century, the

vegetable productions of the soil, there was at that time nothing
which could well justify such a representation of them.

muslins and other cotton goods of the East Indies were much
esteemed in every part of Europe, the cotton manufacture itself

The cori, something between a rat and a rabbit, and supposed
by Mr Buffon to be the same with the aperea of Brazil, was the

was not cultivated in any part of it. Even this production, therefore, could not at that time appear in the eyes of Europeans to be

largest viviparous quadruped in St. Domingo. This species seems

of very great consequence.

451

The Wealth of Nations
Finding nothing, either in the animals or vegetables of the newly
discovered countries which could justify a very advantageous rep-

were preceded by six or seven of the wretched natives, whose singular colour and appearance added greatly to the novelty of the

resentation of them, Columbus turned his view towards their minerals; and in the richness of their productions of this third king-

show.
In consequence of the representations of Columbus, the coun-

dom, he flattered himself he had found a full compensation for
the insignificancy of those of the other two. The little bits of gold

cil of Castile determined to take possession of the countries of
which the inhabitants were plainly incapable of defending them-

with which the inhabitants ornamented their dress, and which, he
was informed, they frequently found in the rivulets and torrents

selves. The pious purpose of converting them to Christianity sanctified the injustice of the project. But the hope of finding treasures

which fell from the mountains, were sufficient to satisfy him that
those mountains abounded with the richest gold mines. St.

of gold there was the sole motive which prompted to undertake it;
and to give this motive the greater weight, it was proposed by

Domingo, therefore, was represented as a country abounding with
gold, and upon that account (according to the prejudices not only

Columbus, that the half of all the gold and silver that should be
found there, should belong to the crown. This proposal was ap-

of the present times, but of those times), an inexhaustible source
of real wealth to the crown and kingdom of Spain. When Colum-

proved of by the council.
As long as the whole, or the greater part of the gold which the

bus, upon his return from his first voyage, was introduced with a
sort of triumphal honours to the sovereigns of Castile and Arragon,

first adventurers imported into Europe was got by so very easy a
method as the plundering of the defenceless natives, it was not

the principal productions of the countries which he had discovered were carried in solemn procession before him. The only valu-

perhaps very difficult to pay even this heavy tax; but when the
natives were once fairly stript of all that they had, which, in St.

able part of them consisted in some little fillets, bracelets, and
other ornaments of gold, and in some bales of cotton. The rest

Domingo, and in all the other countries discovered by Columbus,
was done completely in six or eight years, and when, in order to

were mere objects of vulgar wonder and curiosity; some reeds of
an extraordinary size, some birds of a very beautiful plumage, and

find more, it had become necessary to dig for it in the mines,
there was no longer any possibility of paying this tax. The rigor-

some stuffed skins of the huge alligator and manati; all of which

ous exaction of it, accordingly, first occasioned, it is said, the total

452

Adam Smith
abandoning of the mines of St. Domingo, which have never been
wrought since. It was soon reduced, therefore, to a third; then to a

disadvantageous lottery in the world, or the one in which the gain
of those who draw the prizes bears the least proportion to the loss

fifth; afterwards to a tenth; and at last to a twentieth part of the
gross produce of the gold mines. The tax upon silver continued

of those who draw the blanks; for though the prizes are few, and
the blanks many, the common price of a ticket is the whole for-

for a long time to be a fifth of the gross produce. It was reduced to
a tenth only in the course of the present century. But the first

tune of a very rich man. Projects of mining, instead of replacing
the capital employed in them, together with the ordinary profits

adventurers do not appear to have been much interested about
silver. Nothing less precious than gold seemed worthy of their

of stock, commonly absorb both capital and profit. They are the
projects, therefore, to which, of all others, a prudent lawgiver, who

attention.
All the other enterprizes of the Spaniards in the New World,

desired to increase the capital of his nation, would least choose to
give any extraordinary encouragement, or to turn towards them a

subsequent to those of Columbus, seem to have been prompted
by the same motive. It was the sacred thirst of gold that carried

greater share of that capital than what would go to them of its
own accord. Such, in reality, is the absurd confidence which al-

Ovieda, Nicuessa, and Vasco Nugnes de Balboa, to the Isthmus of
Darien; that carried Cortes to Mexico, Almagro and Pizarro to

most all men have in their own good fortune, that wherever there
is the least probability of success, too great a share of it is apt to go

Chili and Peru. When those adventurers arrived upon any unknown coast, their first inquiry was always if there was any gold to

to them of its own accord.
But though the judgment of sober reason and experience con-

be found there; and according to the information which they received concerning this particular, they determined either to quit

cerning such projects has always been extremely unfavourable, that
of human avidity has commonly been quite otherwise. The same

the country or to settle in it.
Of all those expensive and uncertain projects, however, which

passion which has suggested to so many people the absurd idea of
the philosopher’s stone, has suggested to others the equally absurd

bring bankruptcy upon the greater part of the people who engage
in them, there is none, perhaps, more perfectly ruinous than the

one of immense rich mines of gold and silver. They did not consider that the value of those metals has, in all ages and nations,

search after new silver and gold mines. It is, perhaps, the most

arisen chiefly from their scarcity, and that their scarcity has arisen

453

The Wealth of Nations
from the very small quantities of them which nature has anywhere
deposited in one place, from the hard and intractable substances

avidity of all their countrymen. Every Spaniard who sailed to
America expected to find an El Dorado. Fortune, too, did upon

with which she has almost everywhere surrounded those small
quantities, and consequently from the labour and expense which

this what she has done upon very few other occasions. She realized in some measure the extravagant hopes of her votaries; and in

are everywhere necessary in order to penetrate, and get at them.
They flattered themselves that veins of those metals might in many

the discovery and conquest of Mexico and Peru (of which the one
happened about thirty, and the other about forty, years after the

places be found, as large and as abundant as those which are commonly found of lead, or copper, or tin, or iron. The dream of Sir

first expedition of Columbus), she presented them with something not very unlike that profusion of the precious metals which

Waiter Raleigh, concerning the golden city and country of El
Dorado, may satisfy us, that even wise men are not always exempt

they sought for.
A project of commerce to the East Indies, therefore, gave occa-

from such strange delusions. More than a hundred years after the
death of that great man, the Jesuit Gumila was still convinced of

sion to the first discovery of the West. A project of conquest gave
occasion to all the establishments of the Spaniards in those newly

the reality of that wonderful country, and expressed, with great
warmth, and, I dare say, with great sincerity, how happy he should

discovered countries. The motive which excited them to this conquest was a project of gold and silver mines; and a course of acci-

be to carry the light of the gospel to a people who could so well
reward the pious labours of their missionary.

dents which no human wisdom could foresee, rendered this project
much more successful than the undertakers had any reasonable

In the countries first discovered by the Spaniards, no gold and
silver mines are at present known which are supposed to be worth

grounds for expecting.
The first adventurers of all the other nations of Europe who

the working. The quantities of those metals which the first adventurers are said to have found there, had probably been very much

attempted to make settlements in America, were animated by the
like chimerical views; but they were not equally successful. It was

magnified, as well as the fertility of the mines which were wrought
immediately after the first discovery. What those adventurers were

more than a hundred years after the first settlement of the Brazils,
before any silver, gold, or diamond mines, were discovered there.

reported to have found, however, was sufficient to inflame the

In the English, French, Dutch, and Danish colonies, none have

454

Adam Smith
ever yet been discovered, at least none that are at present supposed
to be worth the working. The first English settlers in North

PART II

America, however, offered a fifth of all the gold and silver which
should be found there to the king, as a motive for granting them

Causes of the Prosperity of New Colonies

their patents. In the patents of Sir Waiter Raleigh, to the London
and Plymouth companies, to the council of Plymouth, etc. this

The colony of a civilized nation which takes possession either of a
waste country, or of one so thinly inhabited that the natives easily

fifth was accordingly reserved to the crown. To the expectation of
finding gold and silver mines, those first settlers, too, joined that

give place to the new settlers, advances more rapidly to wealth and
greatness than any other human society.

of discovering a north-west passage to the East Indies. They have
hitherto been disappointed in both.

The colonies carry out with them a knowledge of agriculture
and of other useful arts, superior to what can grow up of its own
accord, in the course of many centuries, among savage and barbarous nations. They carry out with them, too, the habit of subordination, some notion of the regular government which takes place
in their own country, of the system of laws which support it, and
of a regular administration of justice; and they naturally establish
something of the same kind in the new settlement. But among
savage and barbarous nations, the natural progress of law and government is still slower than the natural progress of arts, after law
and government have been so far established as is necessary for
their protection. Every colonist gets more land than he can possibly cultivate. He has no rent, and scarce any taxes, to pay. No
landlord shares with him in its produce, and, the share of the
sovereign is commonly but a trifle. He has every motive to render

455

The Wealth of Nations
as great as possible a produce which is thus to be almost entirely
his own. But his land is commonly so extensive, that, with all his

of revenue which the proprietor, who is always the undertaker,
expects from their improvement, constitutes his profit, which, in

own industry, and with all the industry of other people whom he
can get to employ, he can seldom make it produce the tenth part

these circumstances, is commonly very great; but this great profit
cannot be made, without employing the labour of other people in

of what it is capable of producing. He is eager, therefore, to collect
labourers from all quarters, and to reward them with the most

clearing and cultivating the land; and the disproportion between
the great extent of the land and the small number of the people,

liberal wages. But those liberal wages, joined to the plenty and
cheapness of land, soon make those labourers leave him, in order

which commonly takes place in new colonies, makes it difficult
for him to get this labour. He does not, therefore, dispute about

to become landlords themselves, and to reward with equal liberality other labourers, who soon leave them for the same reason that

wages, but is willing to employ labour at any price. The high wages
of labour encourage population. The cheapness and plenty of good

they left their first master. The liberal reward of labour encourages
marriage. The children, during the tender years of infancy, are

land encourage improvement, and enable the proprietor to pay
those high wages. In those wages consists almost the whole price

well fed and properly taken care of; and when they are grown up,
the value of their labour greatly overpays their maintenance. When

of the land; and though they are high, considered as the wages of
labour, they are low, considered as the price of what is so very

arrived at maturity, the high price of labour, and the low price of
land, enable them to establish themselves in the same manner as

valuable. What encourages the progress of population and improvement, encourages that of real wealth and greatness.

their fathers did before them.
In other countries, rent and profit eat up wages, and the two

The progress of many of the ancient Greek colonies towards
wealth and greatness seems accordingly to have been very rapid.

superior orders of people oppress the inferior one; but in new
colonies, the interest of the two superior orders obliges them to

In the course of a century or two, several of them appear to have
rivalled, and even to have surpassed, their mother cities. Syracuse

treat the inferior one with more generosity and humanity, at least
where that inferior one is not in a state of slavery. Waste lands, of

and Agrigentum in Sicily, Tarentum and Locri in Italy, Ephesus
and Miletus in Lesser Asia, appear, by all accounts, to have been at

the greatest natural fertility, are to be had for a trifle. The increase

least equal to any of the cities of ancient Greece. Though posterior

456

Adam Smith
in their establishment, yet all the arts of refinement, philosophy,
poetry, and eloquence, seem to have been cultivated as early, and

America and the West Indies resemble, and even greatly surpass,
those of ancient Greece. In their dependency upon the mother

to have been improved as highly in them as in any part of the
mother country The schools of the two oldest Greek philosophers,

state, they resemble those of ancient Rome; but their great distance from Europe has in all of them alleviated more or less the

those of Thales and Pythagoras, were established, it is remarkable,
not in ancient Greece, but the one in an Asiatic, the other in an

effects of this dependency. Their situation has placed them less in
the view, and less in the power of their mother country. In pursu-

Italian colony. All those colonies had established themselves in
countries inhabited by savage and barbarous nations, who easily

ing their interest their own way, their conduct has upon many
occasions been overlooked, either because not known or not un-

gave place to the new settlers. They had plenty of good land; and
as they were altogether independent of the mother city, they were

derstood in Europe; and upon some occasions it has been fairly
suffered and submitted to, because their distance rendered it diffi-

at liberty to manage their own affairs in the way that they judged
was most suitable to their own interest.

cult to restrain it. Even the violent and arbitrary government of
Spain has, upon many occasions, been obliged to recall or soften

The history of the Roman colonies is by no means so brilliant.
Some of them, indeed, such as Florence, have, in the course of

the orders which had been given for the government of her colonies, for fear of a general insurrection. The progress of all the Eu-

many ages, and after the fall of the mother city, grown up to be
considerable states. But the progress of no one of them seems ever

ropean colonies in wealth, population, and improvement, has accordingly been very great.

to have been very rapid. They were all established in conquered
provinces, which in most cases had been fully inhabited before.

The crown of Spain, by its share of the gold and silver, derived
some revenue from its colonies from the moment of their first

The quantity of land assigned to each colonist was seldom very
considerable, and, as the colony was not independent, they were

establishment. It was a revenue, too, of a nature to excite in human avidity the most extravagant expectation of still greater riches.

not always at liberty to manage their own affairs in the way that
they judged was most suitable to their own interest.

The Spanish colonies, therefore, from the moment of their first
establishment, attracted very much the attention of their mother

In the plenty of good land, the European colonies established in

country; while those of the other European nations were for a

457

The Wealth of Nations
long time in a great measure neglected. The former did not, perhaps, thrive the better in consequence of this attention, nor the

unknown among them. They were ignorant of the use of iron.
They had no coined money, nor any established instrument of

latter the worse in consequence of this neglect. In proportion to
the extent of the country which they in some measure possess, the

commerce of any kind. Their commerce was carried on by barter.
A sort of wooden spade was their principal instrument of agricul-

Spanish colonies are considered as less populous and thriving than
those of almost any other European nation. The progress even of

ture. Sharp stones served them for knives and hatchets to cut with;
fish bones, and the hard sinews of certain animals, served them

the Spanish colonies, however, in population and improvement,
has certainly been very rapid and very great. The city of Lima,

with needles to sew with; and these seem to have been their principal instruments of trade. In this state of things, it seems impos-

founded since the conquest, is represented by Ulloa as containing
fifty thousand inhabitants near thirty years ago. Quito, which had

sible that either of those empires could have been so much improved or so well cultivated as at present, when they are plentifully

been but a miserable hamlet of Indians, is represented by the same
author as in his time equally populous. Gemel i Carreri, a pre-

furnished with all sorts of European cattle, and when the use of
iron, of the plough, and of many of the arts of Europe, have been

tended traveller, it is said, indeed, but who seems everywhere to
have written upon extreme good information, represents the city

introduced among them. But the populousness of every country
must be in proportion to the degree of its improvement and cultiva-

of Mexico as containing a hundred thousand inhabitants; a number which, in spite of all the exaggerations of the Spanish writers,

tion. In spite of the cruel destruction of the natives which followed
the conquest, these two great empires are probably more populous

is probably more than five times greater than what it contained in
the time of Montezuma. These numbers exceed greatly those of

now than they ever were before; and the people are surely very different; for we must acknowledge, I apprehend, that the Spanish

Boston, New York, and Philadelphia, the three greatest cities of
the English colonies. Before the conquest of the Spaniards, there

creoles are in many respects superior to the ancient Indians.
After the settlements of the Spaniards, that of the Portuguese in

were no cattle fit for draught, either in Mexico or Peru. The lama
was their only beast of burden, and its strength seems to have been

Brazil is the oldest of any European nation in America. But as for
a long time after the first discovery neither gold nor silver mines

a good deal inferior to that of a common ass. The plough was

were found in it, and as it afforded upon that account little or no

458

Adam Smith
revenue to the crown, it was for a long time in a great measure
neglected; and during this state of neglect, it grew up to be a great

guese and Brazilians. No one colony in America is supposed to
contain so great a number of people of European extraction.

and powerful colony. While Portugal was under the dominion of
Spain, Brazil was attacked by the Dutch, who got possession of

Towards the end of the fifteenth, and during the greater part of
the sixteenth century, Spain and Portugal were the two great naval

seven of the fourteen provinces into which it is divided. They expected soon to conquer the other seven, when Portugal recovered

powers upon the ocean; for though the commerce of Venice extended to every part of Europe, its fleet had scarce ever sailed be-

its independency by the elevation of the family of Braganza to the
throne. The Dutch, then, as enemies to the Spaniards, became

yond the Mediterranean. The Spaniards, in virtue of the first discovery, claimed all America as their own; and though they could

friends to the Portuguese, who were likewise the enemies of the
Spaniards. They agreed, therefore, to leave that part of Brazil which

not hinder so great a naval power as that of Portugal from settling
in Brazil, such was at that time the terror of their name, that the

they had not conquered to the king of Portugal, who agreed to
leave that part which they had conquered to them, as a matter not

greater part of the other nations of Europe were afraid to establish
themselves in any other part of that great continent. The French,

worth disputing about, with such good allies. But the Dutch government soon began to oppress the Portuguese colonists, who,

who attempted to settle in Florida, were all murdered by the Spaniards. But the declension of the naval power of this latter nation,

instead of amusing themselves with complaints, took arms against
their new masters, and by their own valour and resolution, with

in consequence of the defeat or miscarriage of what they called
their invincible armada, which happened towards the end of the

the connivance, indeed, but without any avowed assistance from
the mother country, drove them out of Brazil. The Dutch, there-

sixteenth century, put it out of their power to obstruct any longer
the settlements of the other European nations. In the course of

fore, finding it impossible to keep any part of the country to themselves, were contented that it should be entirely restored to the

the seventeenth century, therefore, the English, French, Dutch,
Danes, and Swedes, all the great nations who had any ports upon

crown of Portugal. In this colony there are said to be more than
six hundred thousand people, either Portuguese or descended from

the ocean, attempted to make some settlements in the new world.
The Swedes established themselves in New Jersey; and the num-

Portuguese, creoles, mulattoes, and a mixed race between Portu-

ber of Swedish families still to be found there sufficiently demon-

459

The Wealth of Nations
strates, that this colony was very likely to prosper, had it been
protected by the mother country. But being neglected by Sweden,

slow in comparison with that of the greater part of new colonies.
The colony of Surinam, though very considerable, is still inferior

it was soon swallowed up by the Dutch colony of New York, which
again, in 1674, fell under the dominion of the English.

to the greater part of the sugar colonies of the other European
nations. The colony of Nova Belgia, now divided into the two

The small islands of St. Thomas and Santa Cruz, are the only
countries in the new world that have ever been possessed by the

provinces of New York and New Jersey, would probably have soon
become considerable too, even though it had remained under the

Danes. These little settlements, too, were under the government
of an exclusive company, which had the sole right, both of pur-

government of the Dutch. The plenty and cheapness of good land
are such powerful causes of prosperity, that the very worst govern-

chasing the surplus produce of the colonies, and of supplying them
with such goods of other countries as they wanted, and which,

ment is scarce capable of checking altogether the efficacy of their
operation. The great distance, too, from the mother country, would

therefore, both in its purchases and sales, had not only the power
of oppressing them, but the greatest temptation to do so. The

enable the colonists to evade more or less, by smuggling, the monopoly which the company enjoyed against them. At present, the

government of an exclusive company of merchants is, perhaps,
the worst of all governments for any country whatever. It was not,

company allows all Dutch ships to trade to Surinam, upon paying
two and a-half per cent. upon the value of their cargo for a license;

however, able to stop altogether the progress of these colonies,
though it rendered it more slow and languid. The late king of

and only reserves to itself exclusively, the direct trade from Africa
to America, which consists almost entirely in the slave trade. This

Denmark dissolved this company, and since that time the prosperity of these colonies has been very great.

relaxation in the exclusive privileges of the company, is probably
the principal cause of that degree of prosperity which that colony

The Dutch settlements in the West, as well as those in the East
Indies, were originally put under the government of an exclusive

at present enjoys. Curacoa and Eustatia, the two principal islands
belonging to the Dutch, are free ports, open to the ships of all

company. The progress of some of them, therefore, though it has
been considerable in comparison with that of almost any country

nations; and this freedom, in the midst of better colonies, whose
ports are open to those of one nation only, has been the great

that has been long peopled and established, has been languid and

cause of the prosperity of those two barren islands.

460

Adam Smith
The French colony of Canada was, during the greater part of
the last century, and some part of the present, under the govern-

sion. It is now the most important of the sugar colonies of the
West Indies, and its produce is said to be greater than that of all

ment of an exclusive company. Under so unfavourable an administration, its progress was necessarily very slow, in comparison with

the English sugar colonies put together. The other sugar colonies
of France are in general all very thriving.

that of other new colonies; but it became much more rapid when
this company was dissolved, after the fall of what is called the

But there are no colonies of which the progress has been more
rapid than that of the English in North America.

Mississippi scheme. When the English got possession of this country, they found in it near double the number of inhabitants which

Plenty of good land, and liberty to manage their own affairs
their own way, seem to be the two great causes of the prosperity of

father Charlevoix had assigned to it between twenty and thirty
years before. That jesuit had travelled over the whole country, and

all new colonies.
In the plenty of good land, the English colonies of North

had no inclination to represent it as less inconsiderable than it
really was.

America, though no doubt very abundantly provided, are, however, inferior to those of the Spaniards and Portuguese, and not

The French colony of St. Domingo was established by pirates
and freebooters, who, for a long time, neither required the protec-

superior to some of those possessed by the French before the late
war. But the political institutions of the English colonies have been

tion, nor acknowledged the authority of France; and when that
race of banditti became so far citizens as to acknowledge this au-

more favourable to the improvement and cultivation of this land,
than those of the other three nations.

thority, it was for a long time necessary to exercise it with very
great gentleness. During this period, the population and improve-

First,
The engrossing of uncultivated land, though it has by no means

ment of this colony increased very fast. Even the oppression of the
exclusive company, to which it was for some time subjected with

been prevented altogether, has been more restrained in the English colonies than in any other. The colony law, which imposes

all the other colonies of France, though it no doubt retarded, had
not been able to stop its progress altogether. The course of its

upon every proprietor the obligation of improving and cultivating, within a limited time, a certain proportion of his lands, and

prosperity returned as soon as it was relieved from that oppres-

which, in case of failure, declares those neglected lands grantable

461

The Wealth of Nations
to any other person; though it has not perhaps been very strictly
executed, has, however, had some effect.

noble tenure of chivalry and homage, is alienated, it is, for a limited time, subject to the right of redemption, either by the heir of

Secondly,
In Pennsylvania there is no right of primogeniture, and lands,

the superior, or by the heir of the family; and all the largest estates
of the country are held by such noble tenures, which necessarily

like moveables, are divided equally among all the children of the
family. In three of the provinces of New England, the oldest has

embarrass alienation. But, in a new colony, a great uncultivated
estate is likely to be much more speedily divided by alienation

only a double share, as in the Mosaical law. Though in those provinces, therefore, too great a quantity of land should sometimes be

than by succession. The plenty and cheapness of good land, it has
already been observed, are the principal causes of the rapid pros-

engrossed by a particular individual, it is likely, in the course of a
generation or two, to be sufficiently divided again. In the other

perity of new colonies. The engrossing of land, in effect, destroys
this plenty and cheapness. The engrossing of uncultivated land, be-

English colonies, indeed, the right of primogeniture takes place,
as in the law of England: But in all the English colonies, the ten-

sides, is the greatest obstruction to its improvement; but the labour
that is employed in the improvement and cultivation of land af-

ure of the lands, which are all held by free soccage, facilitates alienation; and the grantee of an extensive tract of land generally finds

fords the greatest and most valuable produce to the society. The
produce of labour, in this case, pays not only its own wages and the

it for his interest to alienate, as fast as he can, the greater part of it,
reserving only a small quit-rent. In the Spanish and Portuguese

profit of the stock which employs it, but the rent of the land too
upon which it is employed. The labour of the English colonies,

colonies, what is called the right of majorazzo takes place in the
succession of all those great estates to which any title of honour is

therefore, being more employed in the improvement and cultivation of land, is likely to afford a greater and more valuable produce

annexed. Such estates go all to one person, and are in effect entailed and unalienable. The French colonies, indeed, are subject to

than that of any of the other three nations, which, by the engrossing
of land, is more or less diverted towards other employments.

the custom of Paris, which, in the inheritance of land, is much
more favourable to the younger children than the law of England.

Thirdly,
The labour of the English colonists is not only likely to afford a

But, in the French colonies, if any part of an estate, held by the

greater and more valuable produce, but, in consequence of the

462

Adam Smith
moderation of their taxes, a greater proportion of this produce
belongs to themselves, which they may store up and employ in

establishments in North America, in short, exclusive of those of
Maryland and North Carolina, of which no exact account has

putting into motion a still greater quantity of labour. The English
colonists have never yet contributed any thing towards the de-

been got, did not, before the commencement of the present disturbances, cost the inhabitants about £64,700 a-year; an ever

fence of the mother country, or towards the support of its civil
government. They themselves, on the contrary, have hitherto been

memorable example, at how small an expense three millions of
people may not only be governed but well governed. The most

defended almost entirely at the expense of the mother country;
but the expense of fleets and armies is out of all proportion greater

important part of the expense of government, indeed, that of defence and protection, has constantly fallen upon the mother coun-

than the necessary expense of civil government. The expense of
their own civil government has always been very moderate. It has

try. The ceremonial, too, of the civil government in the colonies,
upon the reception of a new governor, upon the opening of a new

generally been confined to what was necessary for paying competent salaries to the governor, to the judges, and to some other

assembly, etc. though sufficiently decent, is not accompanied with
any expensive pomp or parade. Their ecclesiastical government is

officers of police, and for maintaining a few of the most useful
public works. The expense of the civil establishment of Massachu-

conducted upon a plan equally frugal. Tithes are unknown among
them; and their clergy, who are far from being numerous, are

setts Bay, before the commencement of the present disturbances,
used to be but about £18;000 a-year; that of New Hampshire and

maintained either by moderate stipends, or by the voluntary contributions of the people. The power of Spain and Portugal, on the

Rhode Island, £3500 each; that of Connecticut, £4000; that of
New York and Pennsylvania, £4500 each; that of New Jersey,

contrary, derives some support from the taxes levied upon their
colonies. France, indeed, has never drawn any considerable rev-

£1200; that of Virginia and South Carolina, £8000 each. The
civil establishments of Nova Scotia and Georgia are partly sup-

enue from its colonies, the taxes which it levies upon them being
generally spent among them. But the colony government of all

ported by an annual grant of parliament; but Nova Scotia pays,
besides, about £7000 a-year towards the public expenses of the

these three nations is conducted upon a much more extensive plan,
and is accompanied with a much more expensive ceremonial. The

colony, and Georgia about £2500 a-year. All the different civil

sums spent upon the reception of a new viceroy of Peru, for ex-

463

The Wealth of Nations
ample, have frequently been enormous. Such ceremonials are not
only real taxes paid by the rich colonists upon those particular

foreign nations from trading to them, and has prohibited them
from importing European goods from any foreign nation. But the

occasions, but they serve to introduce among them the habit of
vanity and expense upon all other occasions. They are not only

manner in which this monopoly has been exercised in different
nations, has been very different.

very grievous occasional taxes, but they contribute to establish
perpetual taxes, of the same kind, still more grievous; the ruinous

Some nations have given up the whole commerce of their colonies to an exclusive company, of whom the colonists were obliged

taxes of private luxury and extravagance. In the colonies of all
those three nations, too, the ecclesiastical government is extremely

to buy all such European goods as they wanted, and to whom
they were obliged to sell the whole of their surplus produce. It was

oppressive. Tithes take place in all of them, and are levied with the
utmost rigour in those of Spain and Portugal. All of them, be-

the interest of the company, therefore, not only to sell the former
as dear, and to buy the latter as cheap as possible, but to buy no

sides, are oppressed with a numerous race of mendicant friars,
whose beggary being not only licensed but consecrated by reli-

more of the latter, even at this low price, than what they could
dispose of for a very high price in Europe. It was their interest not

gion, is a most grievous tax upon the poor people, who are most
carefully taught that it is a duty to give, and a very great sin to

only to degrade in all cases the value of the surplus produce of the
colony, but in many cases to discourage and keep down the natu-

refuse them their charity. Over and above all this, the clergy are, in
all of them, the greatest engrossers of land.

ral increase of its quantity. Of all the expedients that can well be
contrived to stunt the natural growth of a new colony, that of an

Fourthly,
In the disposal of their surplus produce, or of what is over and

exclusive company is undoubtedly the most effectual. This, however, has been the policy of Holland, though their company, in

above their own consumption, the English colonies have been more
favoured, and have been allowed a more extensive market, than

the course of the present century, has given up in many respects
the exertion of their exclusive privilege. This, too, was the policy

those of any other European nation. Every European nation has
endeavoured, more or less, to monopolize to itself the commerce

of Denmark, till the reign of the late king. It has occasionally been
the policy of France; and of late, since 1755, after it had been

of its colonies, and, upon that account, has prohibited the ships of

abandoned by all other nations on account of its absurdity, it has

464

Adam Smith
become the policy of Portugal, with regard at least to two of the
principal provinces of Brazil, Pernambucco, and Marannon.

colonies part with their own produce. The more, therefore, they
pay for the one, the less they really get for the other, and the dear-

Other nations, without establishing an exclusive company, have
confined the whole commerce of their colonies to a particular

ness of the one is the same thing with the cheapness of the other.
The policy of Portugal is, in this respect, the same as the ancient

port of the mother country, from whence no ship was allowed to
sail, but either in a fleet and at a particular season, or, if single, in

policy of Spain, with regard to all its colonies, except Pernambucco
and Marannon; and with regard to these it has lately adopted a

consequence of a particular license, which in most cases was very
well paid for. This policy opened, indeed, the trade of the colonies

still worse.
Other nations leave the trade of their colonies free to all their

to all the natives of the mother country, provided they traded from
the proper port, at the proper season, and in the proper vessels.

subjects, who may carry it on from all the different ports of the
mother country, and who have occasion for no other license than

But as all the different merchants, who joined their stocks in order
to fit out those licensed vessels, would find it for their interest to

the common despatches of the custom-house. In this case the
number and dispersed situation of the different traders renders it

act in concert, the trade which was carried on in this manner would
necessarily be conducted very nearly upon the same principles as

impossible for them to enter into any general combination, and
their competition is sufficient to hinder them from making very

that of an exclusive company. The profit of those merchants would
be almost equally exorbitant and oppressive. The colonies would

exorbitant profits. Under so liberal a policy, the colonies are enabled both to sell their own produce, and to buy the goods of

be ill supplied, and would be obliged both to buy very dear, and
to sell very cheap. This, however, till within these few years, had

Europe at a reasonable price; but since the dissolution of the Plymouth company, when our colonies were but in their infancy, this

always been the policy of Spain; and the price of all European
goods, accordingly, is said to have been enormous in the Spanish

has always been the policy of England. It has generally, too, been
that of France, and has been uniformly so since the dissolution of

West Indies. At Quito, we are told by Ulloa, a pound of iron sold
for about 4s:6d., and a pound of steel for about 6s:9d. sterling.

what in England is commonly called their Mississippi company.
The profits of the trade, therefore, which France and England

But it is chiefly in order to purchase European goods that the

carry on with their colonies, though no doubt somewhat higher

465

The Wealth of Nations
than if the competition were free to all other nations, are, however, by no means exorbitant; and the price of European goods,

is the principal obstacle to improvement. By allowing the colonies
a very extensive market for their lumber, the law endeavours to

accordingly, is not extravagantly high in the greater past of the
colonies of either of those nations.

facilitate improvement by raising the price of a commodity which
would otherwise be of little value, and thereby enabling them to

In the exportation of their own surplus produce, too, it is only
with regard to certain commodities that the colonies of Great Brit-

make some profit of what would otherwise be mere expense.
In a country neither half peopled nor half cultivated, cattle natu-

ain are confined to the market of the mother country. These commodities having been enumerated in the act of navigation, and in

rally multiply beyond the consumption of the inhabitants, and are
often, upon that account, of little or no value. But it is necessary, it

some other subsequent acts, have upon that account been called
enumerated commodities. The rest are called non-enumerated,

has already been shown, that the price of cattle should bear a certain
proportion to that of corn, before the greater part of the lands of

and may be exported directly to other countries, provided it is in
British or plantation ships, of which the owners and three fourths

any country can be improved. By allowing to American cattle, in all
shapes, dead and alive, a very extensive market, the law endeavours

of the mariners are British subjects.
Among the non-enumerated commodities are some of the most

to raise the value of a commodity, of which the high price is so very
essential to improvement. The good effects of this liberty, however,

important productions of America and the West Indies, grain of
all sorts, lumber, salt provisions, fish, sugar, and rum.

must be somewhat diminished by the 4th of Geo. III. c. 15, which
puts hides and skins among the enumerated commodities, and

Grain is naturally the first and principal object of the culture of all
new colonies. By allowing them a very extensive market for it, the law

thereby tends to reduce the value of American cattle.
To increase the shipping and naval power of Great Britain by

encourages them to extend this culture much beyond the consumption of a thinly inhabited country, and thus to provide beforehand an

the extension of the fisheries of our colonies, is an object which
the legislature seems to have had almost constantly in view. Those

ample subsistence for a continually increasing population.
In a country quite covered with wood, where timber conse-

fisheries, upon this account, have had all the encouragement which
freedom can give them, and they have flourished accordingly. The

quently is of little or no value, the expense of clearing the ground

New England fishery, in particular, was, before the late distur-

466

Adam Smith
bances, one of the most important, perhaps, in the world. The
whale fishery which, notwithstanding an extravagant bounty, is in

cans carry on to the coast of Africa, from which they bring back
negro slaves in return.

Great Britain carried on to so little purpose, that in the opinion of
many people ( which I do not, however, pretend to warrant), the

If the whole surplus produce of America, in grain of all sorts, in
salt provisions, and in fish, had been put into the enumeration,

whole produce does not much exceed the value of the bounties
which are annually paid for it, is in New England carried on, with-

and thereby forced into the market of Great Britain, it would have
interfered too much with the produce of the industry of our own

out any bounty, to a very great extent. Fish is one of the principal
articles with which the North Americans trade to Spain, Portugal,

people. It was probably not so much from any regard to the interest of America, as from a jealousy of this interference, that those

and the Mediterranean.
Sugar was originally an enumerated commodity, which could

important commodities have not only been kept out of the enumeration, but that the importation into Great Britain of all grain,

only be exported to Great Britain; but in 1751, upon a representation of the sugar-planters, its exportation was permitted to all

except rice, and of all salt provisions, has, in the ordinary state of
the law, been prohibited.

parts of the world. The restrictions, however, with which this liberty was granted, joined to the high price of sugar in Great Brit-

The non-enumerated commodities could originally be exported
to all parts of the world. Lumber and rice having been once put

ain, have rendered it in a great measure ineffectual. Great Britain
and her colonies still continue to be almost the sole market for all

into the enumeration, when they were afterwards taken out of it,
were confined, as to the European market, to the countries that lie

sugar produced in the British plantations. Their consumption increases so fast, that, though in consequence of the increasing im-

south of Cape Finisterre. By the 6th of George III. c. 52, all nonenumerated commodities were subjected to the like restriction.

provement of Jamaica, as well as of the ceded islands, the importation of sugar has increased very greatly within these twenty years,

The parts of Europe which lie south of Cape Finisterre are not
manufacturing countries, and we are less jealous of the colony

the exportation to foreign countries is said to be not much greater
than before.

ships carrying home from them any manufactures which could
interfere with our own.

Rum is a very important article in the trade which the Ameri-

The enumerated commodities are of two sorts; first, such as are

467

The Wealth of Nations
either the peculiar produce of America, or as cannot be produced,
or at least are not produced in the mother country. Of this kind

produced at home, but with that of those which were imported
from foreign countries; because, by means of proper duties, they

are molasses, coffee, cocoa-nuts, tobacco, pimento, ginger,
whalefins, raw silk, cotton, wool, beaver, and other peltry of

might be rendered always somewhat dearer than the former, and
yet a good deal cheaper than the latter. By confining such com-

America, indigo, fustick, and other dyeing woods; secondly, such
as are not the peculiar produce of America, but which are, and

modities to the home market, therefore, it was proposed to discourage the produce, not of Great Britain, but of some foreign

may be produced in the mother country, though not in such quantities as to supply the greater part of her demand, which is princi-

countries with which the balance of trade was believed to be
unfavourable to Great Britain.

pally supplied from foreign countries. Of this kind are all naval
stores, masts, yards, and bowsprits, tar, pitch, and turpentine, pig

The prohibition of exporting from the colonies to any other
country but Great Britain, masts, yards, and bowsprits, tar, pitch,

and bar iron, copper ore, hides and skins, pot and pearl ashes. The
largest importation of commodities of the first kind could not

and turpentine, naturally tended to lower the price of timber in
the colonies, and consequently to increase the expense of clearing

discourage the growth, or interfere with the sale, of any part of the
produce of the mother country. By confining them to the home

their lands, the principal obstacle to their improvement. But about
the beginning of the present century, in 1703, the pitch and tar

market, our merchants, it was expected, would not only be enabled to buy them cheaper in the plantations, and consequently

company of Sweden endeavoured to raise the price of their commodities to Great Britain, by prohibiting their exportation, ex-

to sell them with a better profit at home, but to establish between
the plantations and foreign countries an advantageous carrying

cept in their own ships, at their own price, and in such quantities
as they thought proper. In order to counteract this notable piece

trade, of which Great Britain was necessarily to be the centre or
emporium, as the European country into which those commodi-

of mercantile policy, and to render herself as much as possible
independent, not only of Sweden, but of all the other northern

ties were first to be imported. The importation of commodities of
the second kind might be so managed too, it was supposed, as to

powers, Great Britain gave a bounty upon the importation of naval stores from America; and the effect of this bounty was to raise

interfere, not with the sale of those of the same kind which were

the price of timber in America much more than the confinement

468

Adam Smith
to the home market could lower it; and as both regulations were
enacted at the same time, their joint effect was rather to encourage

market for the produce of one another.
The liberality of England, however, towards the trade of her

than to discourage the clearing of land in America.
Though pig and bar iron, too, have been put among the enu-

colonies, has been confined chiefly to what concerns the market
for their produce, either in its rude state, or in what may be called

merated commodities, yet as, when imported from America, they
are exempted from considerable duties to which they are subject

the very first stage of manufacture. The more advanced or more
refined manufactures, even of the colony produce, the merchants

when imported front any other country, the one part of the regulation contributes more to encourage the erection of furnaces in

and manufacturers of Great Britain chuse to reserve to themselves,
and have prevailed upon the legislature to prevent their establish-

America than the other to discourage it. There is no manufacture
which occasions so great a consumption of wood as a furnace, or

ment in the colonies, sometimes by high duties, and sometimes
by absolute prohibitions.

which can contribute so much to the clearing of a country overgrown with it.

While, for example, Muscovado sugars from the British plantations pay, upon importation, only 6s:4d. the hundred weight, white

The tendency of some of these regulations to raise the value of
timber in America, and thereby to facilitate the clearing of the

sugars pay £1:1:1; and refined, either double or single, in loaves,
£4:2:5 8/20ths. When those high duties were imposed, Great Brit-

land, was neither, perhaps, intended nor understood by the legislature. Though their beneficial effects, however, have been in this

ain was the sole, and she still continues to be, the principal market, to which the sugars of the British colonies could be exported.

respect accidental, they have not upon that account been less real.
The most perfect freedom of trade is permitted between the

They amounted, therefore, to a prohibition, at first of claying or
refining sugar for any foreign market, and at present of claying or

British colonies of America and the West Indies, both in the enumerated and in the non-enumerated commodities Those colonies

refining it for the market which takes off, perhaps, more than
nine-tenths of the whole produce. The manufacture of claying or

are now become so populous and thriving, that each of them finds
in some of the others a great and extensive market for every part of

refining sugar, accordingly, though it has flourished in all the sugar
colonies of France, has been little cultivated in any of those of

its produce. All of them taken together, they make a great internal

England, except for the market of the colonies themselves. While

469

The Wealth of Nations
Grenada was in the hands of the French, there was a refinery of
sugar, by claying, at least upon almost every plantation. Since it

hold manufactures as a private family commonly makes for its
own use, or for that of some of its neighbours in the same prov-

fell into those of the English, almost all works of this kind have
been given up; and there are at present (October 1773), I am

ince.
To prohibit a great people, however, from making all that they

assured, not above two or three remaining in the island. At present,
however, by an indulgence of the custom-house, clayed or refined

can of every part of their own produce, or from employing their
stock and industry in the way that they judge most advantageous

sugar, if reduced from loaves into powder, is commonly imported
as Muscovado.

to themselves, is a manifest violation of the most sacred rights of
mankind. Unjust, however, as such prohibitions may be, they have

While Great Britain encourages in America the manufacturing
of pig and bar iron, by exempting them from duties to which the

not hitherto been very hurtful to the colonies. Land is still so cheap,
and, consequently, labour so dear among them, that they can im-

like commodities are subject when imported from any other country, she imposes an absolute prohibition upon the erection of steel

port from the mother country almost all the more refined or more
advanced manufactures cheaper than they could make them for

furnaces and slit-mills in any of her American plantations. She
will not suffer her colonies to work in those more refined manu-

themselves. Though they had not, therefore, been prohibited from
establishing such manufactures, yet, in their present state of im-

factures, even for their own consumption; but insists upon their
purchasing of her merchants and manufacturers all goods of this

provement, a regard to their own interest would probably have
prevented them from doing so. In their present state of improve-

kind which they have occasion for.
She prohibits the exportation from one province to another by

ment, those prohibitions, perhaps, without cramping their industry, or restraining it from any employment to which it would have

water, and even the carriage by land upon horseback, or in a cart,
of hats, of wools, and woollen goods, of the produce of America;

gone of its own accord, are only impertinent badges of slavery
imposed upon them, without any sufficient reason, by the ground-

a regulation which effectually prevents the establishment of any
manufacture of such commodities for distant sale, and confines

less jealousy of the merchants and manufacturers of the mother
country. In a more advanced state, they might be really oppressive

the industry of her colonists in this way to such coarse and house-

and insupportable.

470

Adam Smith
Great Britain, too, as she confines to her own market some of
the most important productions of the colonies, so, in compensa-

goods are subjected on their importation into Great Britain. Unless, therefore, some part of those duties was drawn back upon

tion, she gives to some of them an advantage in that market, sometimes by imposing higher duties upon the like productions when

exportation, there was an end of the carrying trade; a trade so
much favoured by the mercantile system.

imported from other countries, and sometimes by giving bounties upon their importation from the colonies. In the first way, she

Our colonies, however, are by no means independent foreign
countries; and Great Britain having assumed to herself the exclu-

gives an advantage in the home market to the sugar, tobacco, and
iron of her own colonies; and, in the second, to their raw silk, to

sive right of supplying them with all goods from Europe, might
have forced them (in the same manner as other countries have

their hemp and flax, to their indigo, to their naval stores, and to
their building timber. This second way of encouraging the colony

done their colonies) to receive such goods loaded with all the same
duties which they paid in the mother country. But, on the con-

produce, by bounties upon importation, is, so far as I have been
able to learn, peculiar to Great Britain: the first is not. Portugal

trary, till 1763, the same drawbacks were paid upon the exportation of the greater part of foreign goods to our colonies, as to any

does not content herself with imposing higher duties upon the
importation of tobacco from any other country, but prohibits it

independent foreign country. In 1763, indeed, by the 4th of Geo.
III. c. 15, this indulgence was a good deal abated, and it was en-

under the severest penalties.
With regard to the importation of goods from Europe, England has

acted, “That no part of the duty called the old subsidy should be
drawn back for any goods of the growth, production, or manufac-

likewise dealt more liberally with her colonies than any other nation.
Great Britain allows a part, almost always the half, generally a

ture of Europe or the East Indies, which should be exported from
this kingdom to any British colony or plantation in America; wines,

larger portion, and sometimes the whole, of the duty which is
paid upon the importation of foreign goods, to be drawn back

white calicoes, and muslins, excepted.” Before this law, many different sorts of foreign goods might have been bought cheaper in

upon their exportation to any foreign country. No independent
foreign country, it was easy to foresee, would receive them, if they

the plantations than in the mother country, and some may still.
Of the greater part of the regulations concerning the colony

came to it loaded with the heavy duties to which almost all foreign

trade, the merchants who carry it on, it must be observed, have

471

The Wealth of Nations
been the principal advisers. We must not wonder, therefore, if, in
a great part of them, their interest has been more considered than

both in her revenue, by giving back a great part of the duties which
had been paid upon the importation of such goods; and in her

either that of the colonies or that of the mother country. In their
exclusive privilege of supplying the colonies with all the goods

manufactures, by being undersold in the colony market, in consequence of the easy terms upon which foreign manufactures could

which they wanted from Europe, and of purchasing all such parts
of their surplus produce as could not interfere with any of the

be carried thither by means of those drawbacks. The progress of
the linen manufacture of Great Britain, it is commonly said, has

trades which they themselves carried on at home, the interest of
the colonies was sacrificed to the interest of those merchants. In

been a good deal retarded by the drawbacks upon the re-exportation of German linen to the American colonies.

allowing the same drawbacks upon the re-exportation of the greater
part of European and East India goods to the colonies, as upon

But though the policy of Great Britain, with regard to the trade
of her colonies, has been dictated by the same mercantile spirit as

their re-exportation to any independent country, the interest of
the mother country was sacrificed to it, even according to the

that of other nations, it has, however, upon the whole, been less
illiberal and oppressive than that of any of them.

mercantile ideas of that interest. It was for the interest of the merchants to pay as little as possible for the foreign goods which they

In every thing except their foreign trade, the liberty of the English colonists to manage their own affairs their own way, is com-

sent to the colonies, and, consequently, to get back as much as
possible of the duties which they advanced upon their importa-

plete. It is in every respect equal to that of their fellow-citizens at
home, and is secured in the same manner, by an assembly of the

tion into Great Britain. They might thereby be enabled to sell in
the colonies, either the same quantity of goods with a greater profit,

representatives of the people, who claim the sole right of imposing taxes for the support of the colony government. The authority

or a greater quantity with the same profit, and, consequently, to
gain something either in the one way or the other. It was likewise

of this assembly overawes the executive power; and neither the
meanest nor the most obnoxious colonist, as long as he obeys the

for the interest of the colonies to get all such goods as cheap, and
in as great abundance as possible. But this might not always be for

law, has any thing to fear from the resentment, either of the governor, or of any other civil or military officer in the province. The

the interest of the mother country. She might frequently suffer,

colony assemblies, though, like the house of commons in England,

472

Adam Smith
they are not always a very equal representation of the people, yet
they approach more nearly to that character; and as the executive

country. Their manners are more re publican; and their governments, those of three of the provinces of New England in particu-

power either has not the means to corrupt them, or, on account of
the support which it receives from the mother country, is not un-

lar, have hitherto been more republican too.
The absolute governments of Spain, Portugal, and France, on

der the necessity of doing so, they are, perhaps, in general more
influenced by the inclinations of their constituents. The councils,

the contrary, take place in their colonies; and the discretionary
powers which such governments commonly delegate to all their

which, in the colony legislatures, correspond to the house of lords
in Great Britain, are not composed of a hereditary nobility. In

inferior officers are, on account of the great distance, naturally
exercised there with more than ordinary violence. Under all abso-

some of the colonies, as in three of the governments of New England, those councils are not appointed by the king, but chosen

lute governments, there is more liberty in the capital than in any
other part of the country. The sovereign himself can never have

by the representatives of the people. In none of the English colonies is there any hereditary nobility. In all of them, indeed, as in all

either interest or inclination to pervert the order of justice, or to
oppress the great body of the people. In the capital, his presence

other free countries, the descendant of an old colony family is
more respected than an upstart of equal merit and fortune; but he

overawes, more or less, all his inferior officers, who, in the remoter
provinces, from whence the complaints of the people are less likely

is only more respected, and he has no privileges by which he can
be troublesome to his neighbours. Before the commencement of

to reach him, can exercise their tyranny with much more safety.
But the European colonies in America are more remote than the

the present disturbances, the colony assemblies had not only the
legislative, but a part of the executive power. In Connecticut and

most distant provinces of the greatest empires which had ever been
known before. The government of the English colonies is, per-

Rhode Island, they elected the governor. In the other colonies,
they appointed the revenue officers, who collected the taxes im-

haps, the only one which, since the world began, could give perfect security to the inhabitants of so very distant a province. The

posed by those respective assemblies, to whom those officers were
immediately responsible. There is more equality, therefore, among

administration of the French colonies, however, has always been
conducted with much more gentleness and moderation than that

the English colonists than among the inhabitants of the mother

of the Spanish and Portuguese. This superiority of conduct is suit-

473

The Wealth of Nations
able both to the character of the French nation, and to what forms
the character of every nation, the nature of their government,

by means of cattle, depend very much upon the good management of those cattle; so the profit and success of that which is

which, though arbitrary and violent in comparison with that of
Great Britain, is legal and free in comparison with those of Spain

carried on by slaves must depend equally upon the good management of those slaves; and in the good management of their slaves

and Portugal.
It is in the progress of the North American colonies, however,

the French planters, I think it is generally allowed, are superior to
the English. The law, so far as it gives some weak protection to the

that the superiority of the English policy chiefly appears. The progress
of the sugar colonies of France has been at least equal, perhaps supe-

slave against the violence of his master, is likely to be better executed in a colony where the government is in a great measure

rior, to that of the greater part of those of England; and yet the sugar
colonies of England enjoy a free government, nearly of the same

arbitrary, than in one where it is altogether free. In ever country
where the unfortunate law of slavery is established, the magistrate,

kind with that which takes place in her colonies of North America.
But the sugar colonies of France are not discouraged, like those of

when he protects the slave, intermeddles in some measure in the
management of the private property of the master; and, in a free

England, from refining their own sugar; and what is still of greater
importance, the genius of their government naturally introduces a

country, where the master is, perhaps, either a member of the colony
assembly, or an elector of such a member, he dares not do this but

better management of their negro slaves.
In all European colonies, the culture of the sugar-cane is carried

with the greatest caution and circumspection. The respect which
he is obliged to pay to the master, renders it more difficult for him

on by negro slaves. The constitution of those who have been born
in the temperate climate of Europe could not, it is supposed, sup-

to protect the slave. But in a country where the government is in a
great measure arbitrary, where it is usual for the magistrate to in-

port the labour of digging the ground under the burning sun of
the West Indies; and the culture of the sugar-cane, as it is man-

termeddle even in the management of the private property of individuals, and to send them, perhaps, a lettre de cachet, if they do

aged at present, is all hand labour; though, in the opinion of many,
the drill plough might be introduced into it with great advantage.

not manage it according to his liking, it is much easier for him to
give some protection to the slave; and common humanity natu-

But, as the profit and success of the cultivation which is carried on

rally disposes him to do so. The protection of the magistrate ren-

474

Adam Smith
ders the slave less contemptible in the eyes of his master, who is
thereby induced to consider him with more regard, and to treat

colonies of France, particularly the great colony of St Domingo,
has been raised almost entirely from the gradual improvement

him with more gentleness. Gentle usage renders the slave not only
more faithful, but more intelligent, and, therefore, upon a double

and cultivation of those colonies. It has been almost altogether the
produce of the soil and of the industry of the colonists, or, what

account, more useful. He approaches more to the condition of a
free servant, and may possess some degree of integrity and attach-

comes to the same thing, the price of that produce, gradually accumulated by good management, and employed in raising a still

ment to his master’s interest; virtues which frequently belong to
free servants, but which never can belong to a slave, who is treated

greater produce. But the stock which has improved and cultivated
the sugar colonies of England, has, a great part of it, been sent out

as slaves commonly are in countries where the master is perfectly
free and secure.

from England, and has by no means been altogether the produce
of the soil and industry of the colonists. The prosperity of the

That the condition of a slave is better under an arbitrary than
under a free government, is, I believe, supported by the history of

English sugar colonies has been in a great measure owing to the
great riches of England, of which a part has overflowed, if one

all ages and nations. In the Roman history, the first time we read
of the magistrate interposing to protect the slave from the vio-

may say so, upon these colonies. But the prosperity of the sugar
colonies of France has been entirely owing to the good conduct of

lence of his master, is under the emperors. When Vidius Pollio, in
the presence of Augustus, ordered one of his slaves, who had com-

the colonists, which must therefore have had some superiority over
that of the English; and this superiority has been remarked in

mitted a slight fault, to be cut into pieces and thrown into his fishpond, in order to feed his fishes, the emperor commanded him,

nothing so much as in the good management of their slaves.
Such have been the general outlines of the policy of the differ-

with indignation, to emancipate immediately, not only that slave,
but all the others that belonged to him. Under the republic no

ent European nations with regard to their colonies.
The policy of Europe, therefore, has very little to boast of, ei-

magistrate could have had authority enough to protect the slave,
much less to punish the master.

ther in the original establishment, or, so far as concerns their internal government, in the subsequent prosperity of the colonies of

The stock, it is to be observed, which has improved the sugar

America.

475

The Wealth of Nations
Folly and injustice seem to have been the principles which presided over and directed the first project of establishing those colo-

In effectuation some of the most important of these establishments, the different governments of Europe had as little merit as

nies; the folly of hunting after gold and silver mines, and the injustice of coveting the possession of a country whose harmless

in projecting them. The conquest of Mexico was the project, not
of the council of Spain, but of a governor of Cuba; and it was

natives, far from having ever injured the people of Europe, had
received the first adventurers with every mark of kindness and

effectuated by the spirit of the bold adventurer to whom it was
entrusted, in spite of every thing which that governor, who soon

hospitality.
The adventurers, indeed, who formed some of the latter estab-

repented of having trusted such a person, could do to thwart it.
The conquerors of Chili and Peru, and of almost all the other

lishments, joined to the chimerical project of finding gold and silver mines, other motives more reasonable and more laudable; but

Spanish settlements upon the continent of America, carried out
with them no other public encouragement, but a general permis-

even these motives do very little honour to the policy of Europe.
The English puritans, restrained at home, fled for freedom to

sion to make settlements and conquests in the name of the king of
Spain. Those adventures were all at the private risk and expense of

America, and established there the four governments of New England. The English catholics, treated with much greater injustice,

the adventurers. The government of Spain contributed scarce any
thing to any of them. That of England contributed as little to-

established that of Maryland; the quakers, that of Pennsylvania.
The Portuguese Jews, persecuted by the inquisition, stript of their

wards effectuating the establishment of some of its most important colonies in North America.

fortunes, and banished to Brazil, introduced, by their example,
some sort of order and industry among the transported felons and

When those establishments were effectuated, and had become
so considerable as to attract the attention of the mother country,

strumpets by whom that colony was originally peopled, and taught
them the culture of the sugar-cane. Upon all these different occa-

the first regulations which she made with regard to them, had
always in view to secure to herself the monopoly of their com-

sions, it was not the wisdom and policy, but the disorder and injustice of the European governments, which peopled and culti-

merce; to confine their market, and to enlarge her own at their
expense, and, consequently, rather to damp and discourage, than

vated America.

to quicken and forward the course of their prosperity. In the dif-

476

Adam Smith
ferent ways in which this monopoly has been exercised, consists
one of the most essential differences in the policy of the different

PART III

European nations with regard to their colonies. The best of them
all, that of England, is only somewhat less illiberal and oppressive

Of the Advantages which Europe has derived From the
Discovery of America, and from that of a Passage to the

than that of any of the rest.
In what way, therefore, has the policy of Europe contributed

East Indies by the Cape of Good Hope

either to the first establishment, or to the present grandeur of the
colonies of America? In one way, and in one way only, it has con-

SUCH ARE THE ADVANTAGES which the colonies of America have
derived from the policy of Europe.

tributed a good deal. Magna virum mater! It bred and formed the
men who were capable of achieving such great actions, and of

What are those which Europe has derived from the discovery
and colonization of America?

laying the foundation of so great an empire; and there is no other
quarter of the world; of which the policy is capable of forming, or

Those advantages may be divided, first, into the general advantages which Europe, considered as one great country, has derived

has ever actually, and in fact, formed such men. The colonies owe
to the policy of Europe the education and great views of their

from those great events; and, secondly, into the particular advantages which each colonizing country has derived from the colo-

active and enterprizing founders; and some of the greatest and
most important of them, so far as concerns their internal govern-

nies which particularly belong to it, in consequence of the authority or dominion which it exercises over them.

ment, owe to it scarce anything else.

The general advantages which Europe, considered as one great
country, has derived from the discovery and colonization of
America, consist, first, in the increase of its enjoyments; and, secondly, in the augmentation of its industry.
The surplus produce of America imported into Europe, furnishes the inhabitants of this great continent with a variety of
commodities which they could not otherwise have possessed; some

477

The Wealth of Nations
for conveniency and use, some for pleasure, and some for ornament; and thereby contributes to increase their enjoyments.

had been purchased with some part of that produce. Those commodities of America are new values, new equivalents, introduced

The discovery and colonization of America, it will readily be
allowed, have contributed to augment the industry, first, of all the

into Hungary and Poland, to be exchanged there for the surplus
produce of these countries. By being carried thither, they create a

countries which trade to it directly, such as Spain, Portugal, France,
and England; and, secondly, of all those which, without trading

new and more extensive market for that surplus produce. They
raise its value, and thereby contribute to encourage its increase.

to it directly, send, through the medium of other countries, goods
to it of their own produce, such as Austrian Flanders, and some

Though no part of it may ever be carried to America, it may be
carried to other countries, which purchase it with a part of their

provinces of Germany, which, through the medium of the countries before mentioned, send to it a considerable quantity of linen

share of the surplus produce of America, and it may find a market
by means of the circulation of that trade which was originally put

and other goods. All such countries have evidently gained a more
extensive market for their surplus produce, and must consequently

into motion by the surplus produce of America.
Those great events may even have contributed to increase the

have been encouraged to increase its quantity.
But that those great events should likewise have contributed to

enjoyments, and to augment the industry, of countries which not
only never sent any commodities to America, but never received

encourage the industry of countries such as Hungary and Poland,
which may never, perhaps, have sent a single commodity of their

any from it. Even such countries may have received a greater abundance of other commodities from countries, of which the surplus

own produce to America, is not, perhaps, altogether so evident.
That those events have done so, however, cannot be doubted. Some

produce had been augmented by means of the American trade.
This greater abundance, as it must necessarily have increased their

part of the produce of America is consumed in Hungary and Poland, and there is some demand there for the sugar, chocolate, and

enjoyments, so it must likewise have augmented their industry. A
greater number of new equivalents, of some kind or other, must

tobacco, of that new quarter of the world. But those commodities
must be purchased with something which is either the produce of

have been presented to them to be exchanged for the surplus produce of that industry. A more extensive market must have been

the industry of Hungary and Poland, or with something which

created for that surplus produce, so as to raise its value, and thereby

478

Adam Smith
encourage its increase. The mass of commodities annually thrown
into the great circle of European commerce, and by its various

but of the colonies more than of any other. It not only excludes as
much as possible all other countries from one particular market,

revolutions annually distributed among all the different nations
comprehended within it, must have been augmented by the whole

but it confines as much as possible the colonies to one particular
market; and the difference is very great between being excluded

surplus produce of America. A greater share of this greater mass,
therefore, is likely to have fallen to each of those nations, to have

from one particular market when all others are open, and being
confined to one particular market when all others are shut up.

increased their enjoyments, and augmented their industry.
The exclusive trade of the mother countries tends to diminish,

The surplus produce of the colonies, however, is the original source
of all that increase of enjoyments and industry which Europe de-

or at least to keep down below what they would otherwise rise to,
both the enjoyments and industry of all those nations in general,

rives from the discovery and colonization of America, and the
exclusive trade of the mother countries tends to render this source

and of the American colonies in particular. It is a dead weight
upon the action of one of the great springs which puts into mo-

much less abundant than it otherwise would be.
The particular advantages which each colonizing country derives

tion a great part of the business of mankind. By rendering the
colony produce dearer in all other countries, it lessens its con-

from the colonies which particularly belong to it, are of two different kinds; first, those common advantages which every empire de-

sumption, and thereby cramps the industry of the colonies, and
both the enjoyments and the industry of all other countries, which

rives from the provinces subject to its dominion; and, secondly, those
peculiar advantages which are supposed to result from provinces of

both enjoy less when they pay more for what they enjoy, and produce less when they get less for what they produce. By rendering

so very peculiar a nature as the European colonies of America.
The common advantages which every empire derives from the

the produce of all other countries dearer in the colonies, it cramps
in the same manner the industry of all other colonies, and both

provinces subject to its dominion consist, first, in the military
force which they furnish for its defence; and, secondly, in the rev-

the enjoyments and the industry of the colonies. It is a clog which,
for the supposed benefit of some particular countries, embarrasses

enue which they furnish for the support of its civil government.
The Roman colonies furnished occasionally both the one and the

the pleasures and encumbers the industry of all other countries,

other. The Greek colonies sometimes furnished a military force,

479

The Wealth of Nations
but seldom any revenue. They seldom acknowledged themselves
subject to the dominion of the mother city. They were generally

posed to result from provinces of so very peculiar a nature as the
European colonies of America; and the exclusive trade, it is ac-

her allies in war, but very seldom her subjects in peace.
The European colonies of America have never yet furnished any

knowledged, is the sole source of all those peculiar advantages.
In consequence of this exclusive trade, all that part of the sur-

military force for the defence of the mother country. The military
force has never yet been sufficient for their own defence; and in

plus produce of the English colonies, for example, which consists
in what are called enumerated commodities, can be sent to no

the different wars in which the mother countries have been engaged, the defence of their colonies has generally occasioned a

other country but England. Other countries must afterwards buy
it of her. It must be cheaper, therefore, in England than it can be

very considerable distraction of the military force of those countries. In this respect, therefore, all the European colonies have,

in any other country, and must contribute more to increase the
enjoyments of England than those of any other country. It must

without exception, been a cause rather of weakness than of strength
to their respective mother countries.

likewise contribute more to encourage her industry. For all those
parts of her own surplus produce which England exchanges for

The colonies of Spain and Portugal only have contributed any
revenue towards the defence of the mother country, or the sup-

those enumerated commodities, she must get a better price than
any other countries can get for the like parts of theirs, when they

port of her civil government. The taxes which have been levied
upon those of other European nations, upon those of England in

exchange them for the same commodities. The manufactures of
England, for example, will purchase a greater quantity of the sugar

particular, have seldom been equal to the expense laid out upon
them in time of peace, and never sufficient to defray that which

and tobacco of her own colonies than the like manufactures of
other countries can purchase of that sugar and tobacco. So far,

they occasioned in time of war. Such colonies, therefore, have been
a source of expense, and not of revenue, to their respective mother

therefore, as the manufactures of England and those of other countries are both to be exchanged for the sugar and tobacco of the

countries.
The advantages of such colonies to their respective mother coun-

English colonies, this superiority of price gives an encouragement
to the former beyond what the latter can, in these circumstances,

tries, consist altogether in those peculiar advantages which are sup-

enjoy. The exclusive trade of the colonies, therefore, as it dimin-

480

Adam Smith
ishes, or at least keeps down below what they would otherwise rise
to, both the enjoyments and the industry of the countries which

price of tobacco might, and probably would, by this time have
fallen somewhat lower than it is at present. An equal quantity of

do not possess it, so it gives an evident advantage to the countries
which do possess it over those other countries.

the commodities, either of England or of those other countries,
might have purchased in Maryland and Virginia a greater quan-

This advantage, however, will, perhaps, be found to be rather
what may be called a relative than an absolute advantage, and to

tity of tobacco than it can do at present, and consequently have
been sold there for so much a better price. So far as that weed,

give a superiority to the country which enjoys it, rather by depressing the industry and produce of other countries, than by rais-

therefore, can, by its cheapness and abundance, increase the enjoyments, or augment the industry, either of England or of any

ing those of that particular country above what they would naturally rise to in the case of a free trade.

other country, it would probably, in the case of a free trade, have
produced both these effects in somewhat a greater degree than it

The tobacco of Maryland and Virginia, for example, by means
of the monopoly which England enjoys of it, certainly comes

can do at present. England, indeed, would not, in this case, have
had any advantage over other countries. She might have bought

cheaper to England than it can do to France to whom England
commonly sells a considerable part of it. But had France and all

the tobacco of her colonies somewhat cheaper, and consequently
have sold some of her own commodities somewhat dearer, than

other European countries been at all times allowed a free trade to
Maryland and Virginia, the tobacco of those colonies might by

she actually does; but she could neither have bought the one
cheaper, nor sold the other dearer, than any other country might

this time have come cheaper than it actually does, not only to all
those other countries, but likewise to England. The produce of

have done. She might, perhaps, have gained an absolute, but she
would certainly have lost a relative advantage.

tobacco, in consequence of a market so much more extensive than
any which it has hitherto enjoyed, might, and probably would, by

In order, however, to obtain this relative advantage in the colony
trade, in order to execute the invidious and malignant project of

this time have been so much increased as to reduce the profits of a
tobacco plantation to their natural level with those of a corn plan-

excluding, as much as possible, other nations from any share in it,
England, there are very probable reasons for believing, has not

tation, which it is supposed they are still somewhat above. The

only sacrificed a part of the absolute advantage which she, as well

481

The Wealth of Nations
as every other nation, might have derived from that trade, but has
subjected herself both to an absolute and to a relative disadvan-

trade, so it must have gradually diminished that competition in all
those other branches of trade; as it must have gradually lowered the

tage in almost every other branch of trade.
When, by the act of navigation, England assumed to herself the

profits of the one, so it must have gradually raised those of the other,
till the profits of all came to a new level, different from, and some-

monopoly of the colony trade, the foreign capitals which had before been employed in it, were necessarily withdrawn from it. The

what higher, than that at which they had been before.
This double effect of drawing capital from all other trades, and

English capital, which had before carried on but a part of it, was
now to carry on the whole. The capital which had before supplied

of raising the rate of profit somewhat higher than it otherwise
would have been in all trades, was not only produced by this mo-

the colonies with but a part of the goods which they wanted from
Europe, was now all that was employed to supply them with the

nopoly upon its first establishment, but has continued to be produced by it ever since.

whole. But it could not supply them with the whole; and the goods
with which it did supply them were necessarily sold very dear. The

First,
This monopoly has been continually drawing capital from all

capital which had before bought but a part of the surplus produce
of the colonies, was now all that was employed to buy the whole.

other trades, to be employed in that of the colonies.
Though the wealth of Great Britain has increased very much

But it could not buy the whole at any thing near the old price; and
therefore, whatever it did buy, it necessarily bought very cheap. But

since the establishment of the act of navigation, it certainly has
not increased in the same proportion as that or the colonies. But

in an employment of capital, in which the merchant sold very dear,
and bought very cheap, the profit must have been very great, and

the foreign trade of every country naturally increases in proportion to its wealth, its surplus produce in proportion to its whole

much above the ordinary level of profit in other branches of trade.
This superiority of profit in the colony trade could not fail to draw

produce; and Great Britain having engrossed to herself almost the
whole of what may be called the foreign trade of the colonies, and

from other branches of trade a part of the capital which had before
been employed in them. But this revulsion of capital, as it must

her capital not having increased in the same proportion as the
extent of that trade, she could not carry it on without continually

have gradually increased the competition of capitals in the colony

withdrawing from other branches of trade some part of the capital

482

Adam Smith
which had before been employed in them, as well as withholding
from them a great deal more which would otherwise have gone to

England, it must be observed, was a great trading country, her
mercantile capital was very great, and likely to become still greater

them. Since the establishment of the act of navigation, accordingly, the colony trade has been continually increasing, while many

and greater every day, not only before the act of navigation had
established the monopoly of the corn trade, but before that trade

other branches of foreign trade, particularly of that to other parts
of Europe, have been continually decaying. Our manufactures for

was very considerable. In the Dutch war, during the government
of Cromwell, her navy was superior to that of Holland; and in

foreign sale, instead of being suited, as before the act of navigation, to the neighbouring market of Europe, or to the more dis-

that which broke out in the beginning of the reign of Charles II.,
it was at least equal, perhaps superior to the united navies of France

tant one of the countries which lie round the Mediterranean sea,
have the greater part of them, been accommodated to the still

and Holland. Its superiority, perhaps, would scarce appear greater
in the present times, at least if the Dutch navy were to bear the

more distant one of the colonies; to the market in which they have
the monopoly, rather than to that in which they have many com-

same proportion to the Dutch commerce now which it did then.
But this great naval power could not, in either of those wars, be

petitors. The causes of decay in other branches of foreign trade,
which, by Sir Matthew Decker and other writers, have been sought

owing to the act of navigation. During the first of them, the plan
of that act had been but just formed; and though, before the break-

for in the excess and improper mode of taxation, in the high price
of labour, in the increase of luxury, etc. may all be found in the

ing out of the second, it had been fully enacted by legal authority,
yet no part of it could have had time to produce any considerable

overgrowth of the colony trade. The mercantile capital of Great
Britain, though very great, yet not being infinite, and though greatly

effect, and least of all that part which established the exclusive
trade to the colonies. Both the colonies and their trade were in-

increased since the act of navigation, yet not being increased in
the same proportion as the colony trade, that trade could not pos-

considerable then, in comparison of what they are how. The island of Jamaica was an unwholesome desert, little inhabited, and

sibly be carried on without withdrawing some part of that capital
from other branches of trade, nor consequently without some de-

less cultivated. New York and New Jersey were in the possession of
the Dutch, the half of St. Christopher’s in that of the French. The

cay of those other branches.

island of Antigua, the two Carolinas, Pennsylvania, Georgia, and

483

The Wealth of Nations
Nova Scotia, were not planted. Virginia, Maryland, and New
England were planted; and though they were very thriving colo-

Great Britain had before, as a total change in its direction.
Secondly,

nies, yet there was not perhaps at that time, either in Europe or
America, a single person who foresaw, or even suspected, the rapid

This monopoly has necessarily contributed to keep up the rate
of profit, in all the different branches of British trade, higher than

progress which they have since made in wealth, population, and
improvement. The island of Barbadoes, in short, was the only

it naturally would have been, had all nations been allowed a free
trade to the British colonies.

British colony of any consequence, of which the condition at that
time bore any resemblance to what it is at present. The trade of

The monopoly of the colony trade, as it necessarily drew towards that trade a greater proportion of the capital of Great Brit-

the colonies, of which England, even for some time after the act of
navigation, enjoyed but a part (for the act of navigation was not

ain than what would have gone to it of its own accord, so, by the
expulsion of all foreign capitals, it necessarily reduced the whole

very strictly executed till several years after it was enacted), could
not at that time be the cause of the great trade of England, nor of

quantity of capital employed in that trade below what it naturally
would have been in the case of a free trade. But, by lessening the

the great naval power which was supported by that trade. The
trade which at that time supported that great naval power was the

competition of capitals in that branch of trade, it necessarily raised
the rate of profit in that branch. By lessening, too, the competi-

trade of Europe, and of the countries which lie round the Mediterranean sea. But the share which Great Britain at present enjoys

tion of British capitals in all other branches of trade, it necessarily
raised the rate of British profit in all those other branches. What-

of that trade could not support any such great naval power. Had
the growing trade of the colonies been left free to all nations, what-

ever may have been, at any particular period since the establishment of the act of navigation, the state or extent of the mercantile

ever share of it might have fallen to Great Britain, and a very considerable share would probably have fallen to her, must have been

capital of Great Britain, the monopoly of the colony trade must,
during the continuance of that state, have raised the ordinary rate

all an addition to this great trade of which she was before in possession. In consequence of the monopoly, the increase of the colony

of British profit higher than it otherwise would have been, both in
that and in all the other branches of British trade. If, since the

trade has not so much occasioned an addition to the trade which

establishment of the act of navigation, the ordinary rate of British

484

Adam Smith
profit has fallen considerably, as it certainly has, it must have fallen
still lower, had not the monopoly established by that act contrib-

chants of other countries to undersell her in foreign markets, and
thereby to justle her out of almost all those branches of trade, of

uted to keep it up.
But whatever raises, in any country, the ordinary rate of profit

which she has not the monopoly.
Our merchants frequently complain of the high wages of Brit-

higher than it otherwise would be, necessarily subjects that country both to an absolute, and to a relative disadvantage in every

ish labour, as the cause of their manufactures being undersold in
foreign markets; but they are silent about the high profits of stock.

branch of trade of which she has not the monopoly.
It subjects her to an absolute disadvantage; because, in such

They complain of the extravagant gain of other people; but they
say nothing of their own. The high profits of British stock, how-

branches of trade, her merchants cannot get this greater profit
without selling dearer than they otherwise would do, both the

ever, may contribute towards raising the price of British manufactures, in many cases, as much, and in some perhaps more, than

goods of foreign countries which they import into their own, and
the goods of their own country which they export to foreign coun-

the high wages of British labour.
It is in this manner that the capital of Great Britain, one may

tries. Their own country must both buy dearer and sell dearer;
must both buy less, and sell less; must both enjoy less and produce

justly say, has partly been drawn and partly been driven from the
greater part of the different branches of trade of which she has not

less, than she otherwise would do.
It subjects her to a relative disadvantage; because, in such

the monopoly; from the trade of Europe, in particular, and from
that of the countries which lie round the Mediterranean sea.

branches of trade, it sets other countries, which are not subject to
the same absolute disadvantage, either more above her or less be-

It has partly been drawn from those branches of trade, by the
attraction of superior profit in the colony trade, in consequence of

low her, than they otherwise would be. It enables them both to
enjoy more and to produce more, in proportion to what she en-

the continual increase of that trade, and of the continual insufficiency of the capital which had carried it on one year to carry it on

joys and produces. It renders their superiority greater, or their inferiority less, than it otherwise would be. By raising the price of

the next.
It has partly been driven from them, by the advantage which

her produce above what it otherwise would be, it enables the mer-

the high rate of profit established in Great Britain gives to other

485

The Wealth of Nations
countries, in all the different branches of trade of which Great
Britain has not the monopoly.

produce of the land and labour of that country. But the quantity
of productive labour which any capital employed in the foreign

As the monopoly of the colony trade has drawn from those other
branches a part of the British capital, which would otherwise have

trade of consumption can maintain, is exactly in proportion, it
has been shown in the second book, to the frequency of its re-

been employed in them, so it has forced into them many foreign
capitals which would never have gone to them, had they not been

turns. A capital of a thousand pounds, for example, employed in a
foreign trade of consumption, of which the returns are made regu-

expelled from the colony trade. In those other branches of trade,
it has diminished the competition of British capitals, and thereby

larly once in the year, can keep in constant employment, in the
country to which it belongs, a quantity of productive labour, equal

raised the rate of British profit higher than it otherwise would
have been. On the contrary, it has increased the competition of

to what a thousand pounds can maintain there for a year. If the
returns are made twice or thrice in the year, it can keep in constant

foreign capitals, and thereby sunk the rate of foreign profit lower
than it otherwise would have been. Both in the one way and in

employment a quantity of productive labour, equal to what two
or three thousand pounds can maintain there for a year. A foreign

the other, it must evidently have subjected Great Britain to a relative disadvantage in all those other branches of trade.

trade of consumption carried on with a neighbouring, is, upon
that account, in general, more advantageous than one carried on

The colony trade, however, it may perhaps be said, is more advantageous to Great Britain than any other; and the monopoly, by

with a distant country; and, for the same reason, a direct foreign
trade of consumption, as it has likewise been shown in the second

forcing into that trade a greater proportion of the capital of Great
Britain than what would otherwise have gone to it, has turned

book, is in general more advantageous than a round-about one.
But the monopoly of the colony trade, so far as it has operated

that capital into an employment, more advantageous to the country than any other which it could have found.

upon the employment of the capital of Great Britain, has, in all
cases, forced some part of it from a foreign trade of consumption

The most advantageous employment of any capital to the country to which it belongs, is that which maintains there the greatest

carried on with a neighbouring, to one carried on with a more
distant country, and in many cases from a direct foreign trade of

quantity of productive labour, and increases the most the annual

consumption to a round-about one.

486

Adam Smith
First,
The monopoly of the colony trade has, in all cases, forced some

nual returns frequently do not amount to more than a third, and
sometimes not to so great a proportion of what they owe. The

part of the capital of Great Britain from a foreign trade of consumption carried on with a neighbouring, to one carried on with

whole capital, therefore, which their correspondents advance to
them, is seldom returned to Britain in less than three, and some-

a more distant country.
It has, in all cases, forced some part of that capital from the

times not in less than four or five years. But a British capital of a
thousand pounds, for example, which is returned to Great Britain

trade with Europe, and with the countries which lie round the
Mediterranean sea, to that with the more distant regions of America

only once in five years, can keep in constant employment only
one-fifth part of the British industry which it could maintain, if

and the West Indies; from which the returns are necessarily less
frequent, not only on account of the greater distance, but on ac-

the whole was returned once in the year; and, instead of the quantity of industry which a thousand pounds could maintain for a

count of the peculiar circumstances of those countries. New colonies, it has already been observed, are always understocked. Their

year, can keep in constant employment the quantity only which
two hundred pounds can maintain for a year. The planter, no

capital is always much less than what they could employ with
great profit and advantage in the improvement and cultivation of

doubt, by the high price which he pays for the goods from Europe, by the interest upon the bills which he grants at distant dates,

their land. They have a constant demand, therefore, for more capital
than they have of their own; and, in order to supply the deficiency

and by the commission upon the renewal of those which he grants
at near dates, makes up, and probably more than makes up, all the

of their own, they endeavour to borrow as much as they can of the
mother country, to whom they are, therefore, always in debt. The

loss which his correspondent can sustain by this delay. But, though
he make up the loss of his correspondent, he cannot make up that

most common way in which the colonies contract this debt, is not
by borrowing upon bond of the rich people of the mother coun-

of Great Britain. In a trade of which the returns are very distant,
the profit of the merchant may be as great or greater than in one

try, though they sometimes do this too, but by running as much
in arrear to their correspondents, who supply them with goods

in which they are very frequent and near; but the advantage of the
country in which he resides, the quantity of productive labour

from Europe, as those correspondents will allow them. Their an-

constantly maintained there, the annual produce of the land and

487

The Wealth of Nations
labour, must always be much less. That the returns of the trade to
America, and still more those of that to the West Indies, are, in

that part of the capital of Great Britain which brings those eightytwo thousand hogsheads to Great Britain, which re-exports them

general, not only more distant, but more irregular and more uncertain, too, than those of the trade to any part of Europe, or even

from thence to those other countries, and which brings back from
those other countries to Great Britain either goods or money in

of the countries which lie round the Mediterranean sea, will readily
be allowed, I imagine, by everybody who has any experience of

return, is employed in a round-about foreign trade of consumption; and is necessarily forced into this employment, in order to

those different branches of trade.
Secondly,

dispose of this great surplus. If we would compute in how many
years the whole of this capital is likely to come back to Great

The monopoly of the colony trade, has, in many cases, forced
some part of the capital of Great Britain from a direct foreign

Britain, we must add to the distance of the American returns that
of the returns from those other countries. If, in the direct foreign

trade of consumption, into a round-about one.
Among the enumerated commodities which can be sent to no

trade of consumption which we carry on with America, the whole
capital employed frequently does not come back in less than three

other market but Great Britain, there are several of which the quantity exceeds very much the consumption of Great Britain, and of

or four years, the whole capital employed in this round-about one
is not likely to come back in less than four or five. If the one can

which, a part, therefore, must be exported to other countries. But
this cannot be done without forcing some part of the capital of

keep in constant employment but a third or a fourth part of the
domestic industry which could be maintained by a capital returned

Great Britain into a round-about foreign trade of consumption.
Maryland, and Virginia, for example, send annually to Great Brit-

once in the year, the other can keep in constant employment but
a fourth or a fifth part of that industry. At some of the outports a

ain upwards of ninety-six thousand hogsheads of tobacco, and the
consumption of Great Britain is said not to exceed fourteen thou-

credit is commonly given to those foreign correspondents to whom
they export them tobacco. At the port of London, indeed, it is

sand. Upwards of eighty-two thousand hogsheads, therefore, must
be exported to other countries, to France, to Holland, and, to the

commonly sold for ready money: the rule is Weigh and pay. At
the port of London, therefore, the final returns of the whole round-

countries which lie round the Baltic and Mediterranean seas. But

about trade are more distant than the returns from America, by

488

Adam Smith
the time only which the goods may lie unsold in the warehouse;
where, however, they may sometimes lie long enough. But, had

smaller capital, there would have been a large spare capital to apply to other purposes; to improve the lands, to increase the manu-

not the colonies been confined to the market of Great Britain for
the sale of their tobacco, very little more of it would probably

factures, and to extend the commerce of Great Britain; to come
into competition at least with the other British capitals employed

have come to us than what was necessary for the home consumption. The goods which Great Britain purchases at present for her

in all those different ways, to reduce the rate of profit in them all,
and thereby to give to Great Britain, in all of them, a superiority

own consumption with the great surplus of tobacco which she
exports to other countries, she would, in this case, probably have

over other countries, still greater than what she at present enjoys.
The monopoly of the colony trade, too, has forced some part of

purchased with the immediate produce of her own industry, or
with some part of her own manufactures. That produce, those

the capital of Great Britain from all foreign trade of consumption
to a carrying trade; and, consequently from supporting more or

manufactures, instead of being almost entirely suited to one great
market, as at present, would probably have been fitted to a great

less the industry of Great Britain, to be employed altogether in
supporting partly that of the colonies, and partly that of some

number of smaller markets. Instead of one great round-about foreign trade of consumption, Great Britain would probably have

other countries.
The goods, for example, which are annually purchased with the

carried on a great number of small direct foreign trades of the
same kind. On account of the frequency of the returns, a part,

great surplus of eighty-two thousand hogsheads of tobacco annually re-exported from Great Britain, are not all consumed in Great

and probably but a small part, perhaps not above a third or a
fourth of the capital which at present carries on this great round-

Britain. Part of them, linen from Germany and Holland, for example, is returned to the colonies for their particular consump-

about trade, might have been sufficient to carry on all those small
direct ones; might have kept inconstant employment an equal

tion. But that part of the capital of Great Britain which buys the
tobacco with which this linen is afterwards bought, is necessarily

quantity of British industry; and have equally supported the annual produce of the land and labour of Great Britain. All the pur-

withdrawn from supporting the industry of Great Britain, to be
employed altogether in supporting, partly that of the colonies,

poses of this trade being, in this manner, answered by a much

and partly that of the particular countries who pay for this to-

489

The Wealth of Nations
bacco with the produce of their own industry.

expectation of a rupture with the colonies, accordingly, has struck
the people of Great Britain with more terror than they ever felt for

The monopoly of the colony trade, besides, by forcing towards it
a much greater proportion of the capital of Great Britain than

a Spanish armada, or a French invasion. It was this terror, whether
well or ill grounded, which rendered the repeal of the stamp act,

what would naturally have gone to it, seems to have broken altogether that natural balance which would otherwise have taken place

among the merchants at least, a popular measure. In the total exclusion from the colony market, was it to last only for a few years,

among all the different branches of British industry. The industry
of Great Britain, instead of being accommodated to a great num-

the greater part of our merchants used to fancy that they foresaw
an entire stop to their trade; the greater part of our master manu-

ber of small markets, has been principally suited to one great market. Her commerce, instead of running in a great number of small

facturers, the entire ruin of their business; and the greater part of
our workmen, an end of their employment. A rupture with any of

channels, has been taught to run principally in one great channel.
But the whole system of her industry and commerce has thereby

our neighbours upon the continent, though likely, too, to occasion some stop or interruption in the employments of some of all

been rendered less secure; the whole state of her body politic less
healthful than it otherwise would have been. In her present condi-

these different orders of people, is foreseen, however, without any
such general emotion. The blood, of which the circulation is stopt

tion, Great Britain resembles one of those unwholesome bodies in
which some of the vital parts are overgrown, and which, upon

in some of the smaller vessels, easily disgorges itself into the greater,
without occasioning any dangerous disorder; but, when it is stopt

that account, are liable to many dangerous disorders, scarce incident to those in which all the parts are more properly propor-

in any of the greater vessels, convulsions, apoplexy, or death, are
the immediate and unavoidable consequences. If but one of those

tioned. A small stop in that great blood-vessel, which has been
artificially swelled beyond its natural dimensions, and through

overgrown manufactures, which, by means either of bounties or
of the monopoly of the home and colony markets, have been arti-

which an unnatural proportion of the industry and commerce of
the country has been forced to circulate, is very likely to bring on

ficially raised up to any unnatural height, finds some small stop or
interruption in its employment, it frequently occasions a mutiny

the most dangerous disorders upon the whole body politic. The

and disorder alarming to government, and embarrassing even to

490

Adam Smith
the deliberations of the legislature. How great, therefore, would
be the disorder and confusion, it was thought, which must neces-

They not only introduce very dangerous disorders into the state
of the body politic, but disorders which it is often difficult to

sarily be occasioned by a sudden and entire stop in the employment of so great a proportion of our principal manufacturers?

remedy, without occasioning, for a time at least, still greater disorders. In what manner, therefore, the colony trade ought gradually

Some moderate and gradual relaxation of the laws which give to
Great Britain the exclusive trade to the colonies, till it is rendered

to be opened; what are the restraints which ought first, and what
are those which ought last, to be taken away; or in what manner

in a great measure free, seems to be the only expedient which can,
in all future times, deliver her from this danger; which can enable

the natural system of perfect liberty and justice ought gradually to
be restored, we must leave to the wisdom of future statesmen and

her, or even force her, to withdraw some part of her capital from
this overgrown employment, and to turn it, though with less profit,

legislators to determine.
Five different events, unforeseen and unthought of, have very

towards other employments; and which, by gradually diminishing one branch of her industry, and gradually increasing all the

fortunately concurred to hinder Great Britain from feeling, so sensibly as it was generally expected she would, the total exclusion

rest, can, by degrees, restore all the different branches of it to that
natural, healthful, and proper proportion, which perfect liberty

which has now taken place for more than a year (from the first of
December 1774) from a very important branch of the colony trade,

necessarily establishes, and which perfect liberty can alone preserve. To open the colony trade all at once to all nations, might

that of the twelve associated provinces of North America. First,
those colonies, in preparing themselves for their non-importation

not only occasion some transitory inconveniency, but a great permanent loss, to the greater part of those whose industry or capital

agreement, drained Great Britain completely of all the commodities which were fit for their market; secondly, the extra ordinary

is at present engaged in it. The sudden loss of the employment,
even of the ships which import the eighty-two thousand hogs-

demand of the Spanish flota has, this year, drained Germany and
the north of many commodities, linen in particular, which used

heads of tobacco, which are over and above the consumption of
Great Britain, might alone be felt very sensibly. Such are the un-

to come into competition, even in the British market, with the
manufactures of Great Britain; thirdly, the peace between Russia

fortunate effects of all the regulations of the mercantile system.

and Turkey has occasioned an extraordinary demand from the

491

The Wealth of Nations
Turkey market, which, during the distress of the country, and while
a Russian fleet was cruizing in the Archipelago, had been very

into a carrying trade. It has, in all cases, therefore, turned it from
a direction in which it would have maintained a greater quantity

poorly supplied; fourthly, the demand of the north of Europe for
the manufactures of Great Britain has been increasing from year

of productive labour, into one in which it can maintain a much
smaller quantity. By suiting, besides, to one particular market only,

to year, for some time past; and, fifthly, the late partition, and
consequential pacification of Poland, by opening the market of

so great a part of the industry and commerce of Great Britain, it
has rendered the whole state of that industry and commerce more

that great country, have, this year, added an extraordinary demand
from thence to the increasing demand of the north. These events

precarious and less secure, than if their produce had been accommodated to a greater variety of markets.

are all, except the fourth, in their nature transitory and accidental;
and the exclusion from so important a branch of the colony trade,

We must carefully distinguish between the effects of the colony
trade and those of the monopoly of that trade. The former are

if unfortunately it should continue much longer, may still occasion some degree of distress. This distress, however, as it will come

always and necessarily beneficial; the latter always and necessarily
hurtful. But the former are so beneficial, that the colony trade,

on gradually, will be felt much less severely than if it had come on
all at once; and, in the mean time, the industry and capital of the

though subject to a monopoly, and, notwithstanding the hurtful
effects of that monopoly, is still, upon the whole, beneficial, and

country may find a new employment and direction, so as to prevent this distress from ever rising to any considerable height.

greatly beneficial, though a good deal less so than it otherwise
would be.

The monopoly of the colony trade, therefore, so far as it has
turned towards that trade a greater proportion of the capital of

The effect of the colony trade, in its natural and free state, is to
open a great though distant market, for such parts of the produce

Great Britain than what would otherwise have gone to it, has in
all cases turned it, from a foreign trade of consumption with a

of British industry as may exceed the demand of the markets nearer
home, of those of Europe, and of the countries which lie round

neighbouring, into one with a more distant country; in many cases
from a direct foreign trade of consumption into a round-about

the Mediterranean sea. In its natural and free state, the colony
trade, without drawing from those markets any part of the pro-

one; and, in some cases, from all foreign trade of consumption

duce which had ever been sent to them, encourages Great Britain

492

Adam Smith
to increase the surplus continually, by continually presenting new
equivalents to be exchanged for it. In its natural and free state, the

than those of the greater part of other trades, a greater proportion
of the capital of any country, than what of its own accord would

colony trade tends to increase the quantity of productive labour
in Great Britain, but without altering in any respect the direction

go to that branch, necessarily renders the whole quantity of productive labour annually maintained there, the whole annual pro-

of that which had been employed there before. In the natural and
free state of the colony trade, the competition of all other nations

duce of the land and labour of that country, less than they otherwise would be. It keeps down the revenue of the inhabitants of

would hinder the rate of profit from rising above the common
level, either in the new market, or in the new employment. The

that country below what it would naturally rise to, and thereby
diminishes their power of accumulation. It not only hinders, at all

new market, without drawing any thing from the old one, would
create, if one may say so, a new produce for its own supply; and

times, their capital from maintaining so great a quantity of productive labour as it would otherwise maintain, but it hinders it

that new produce would constitute a new capital for carrying on
the new employment, which, in the same manner, would draw

from increasing so fast as it would otherwise increase, and, consequently, from maintaining a still greater quantity of productive

nothing from the old one.
The monopoly of the colony trade, on the contrary, by exclud-

labour.
The natural good effects of the colony trade, however, more

ing the competition of other nations, and thereby raising the rate
of profit, both in the new market and in the new employment,

than counterbalance to Great Britain the bad effects of the monopoly; so that, monopoly and altogether, that trade, even as it is

draws produce from the old market, and capital from the old employment. To augment our share of the colony trade beyond what

carried on at present, is not only advantageous, but greatly advantageous. The new market and the new employment which are

it otherwise would be, is the avowed purpose of the monopoly. If
our share of that trade were to be no greater with, than it would

opened by the colony trade, are of much greater extent than that
portion of the old market and of the old employment which is

have been without the monopoly, there could have been no reason for establishing the monopoly. But whatever forces into a

lost by the monopoly. The new produce and the new capital which
has been created, if one may say so, by the colony trade, maintain

branch of trade, of which the returns are slower and more distant

in Great Britain a greater quantity of productive labour than what

493

The Wealth of Nations
can have been thrown out of employment by the revulsion of capital
from other trades of which the returns are more frequent. If the

trade to America.
But that the monopoly of the trade of populous and thriving

colony trade, however, even as it is carried on at present, is advantageous to Great Britain, it is not by means of the monopoly, but

colonies is not alone sufficient to establish, or even to maintain,
manufactures in any country, the examples of Spain and Portugal

in spite of the monopoly.
It is rather for the manufactured than for the rude produce of

sufficiently demonstrate. Spain and Portugal were manufacturing
countries before they had any considerable colonies. Since they

Europe, that the colony trade opens a new market. Agriculture is
the proper business of all new colonies; a business which the cheap-

had the richest and most fertile in the world, they have both ceased
to be so.

ness of land renders more advantageous than any other. They
abound, therefore, in the rude produce of land; and instead of

In Spain and Portugal, the bad effects of the monopoly, aggravated by other causes, have, perhaps, nearly overbalanced the natu-

importing it from other countries, they have generally a large surplus to export. In new colonies, agriculture either draws hands

ral good effects of the colony trade. These causes seem to be other
monopolies of different kinds: the degradation of the value of gold

from all other employments, or keeps them from going to any
other employment. There are few hands to spare for the necessary,

and silver below what it is in most other countries; the exclusion
from foreign markets by improper taxes upon exportation, and

and none for the ornamental manufactures. The greater part of
the manufactures of both kinds they find it cheaper to purchase of

the narrowing of the home market, by still more improper taxes
upon the transportation of goods from one part of the country to

other countries than to make for themselves. It is chiefly by encouraging the manufactures of Europe, that the colony trade indi-

another; but above all, that irregular and partial administration of
justice which often protects the rich and powerful debtor from

rectly encourages its agriculture. The manufacturers of Europe, to
whom that trade gives employment, constitute a new market for

the pursuit of his injured creditor, and which makes the industrious part of the nation afraid to prepare goods for the consump-

the produce of the land, and the most advantageous of all markets; the home market for the corn and cattle, for the bread and

tion of those haughty and great men, to whom they dare not refuse
to sell upon credit, and from whom they are altogether uncertain

butcher’s meat of Europe, is thus greatly extended by means of the

of repayment.

494

Adam Smith
In England, on the contrary, the natural good effects of the colony
trade, assisted by other causes, have in a great measure conquered

been accommodated to one from which the returns are frequent
and near. Its effect has consequently been, to turn a part of the

the bad effects of the monopoly. These causes seem to be, the
general liberty of trade, which, notwithstanding some restraints,

capital of Great Britain from an employment in which it would
have maintained a greater quantity of manufacturing industry, to

is at least equal, perhaps superior, to what it is in any other country; the liberty of exporting, duty free, almost all sorts of goods

one in which it maintains a much smaller, and thereby to diminish, instead of increasing, the whole quantity of manufacturing

which are the produce of domestic industry, to almost any foreign
country; and what, perhaps, is of still greater importance, the un-

industry maintained in Great Britain.
The monopoly of the colony trade, therefore, like all the other

bounded liberty of transporting them from one part of our own
country to any other, without being obliged to give any account

mean and malignant expedients of the mercantile system, depresses
the industry of all other countries, but chiefly that of the colonies,

to any public office, without being liable to question or examination of any kind; but, above all, that equal and impartial adminis-

without in the least increasing, but on the contrary diminishing,
that of the country in whose favour it is established.

tration of justice, which renders the rights of the meanest British
subject respectable to the greatest, and which, by securing to every

The monopoly hinders the capital of that country, whatever
may, at any particular time, be the extent of that capital, from

man the fruits of his own industry, gives the greatest and most
effectual encouragement to every sort of industry.

maintaining so great a quantity of productive labour as it would
otherwise maintain, and from affording so great a revenue to the

If the manufactures of Great Britain, however, have been advanced, as they certainly have, by the colony trade, it has not been

industrious inhabitants as it would otherwise afford. But as capital can be increased only by savings from revenue, the monopoly,

by means of the monopoly of that trade, but in spite of the monopoly. The effect of the monopoly has been, not to augment the

by hindering it from affording so great a revenue as it would otherwise afford, necessarily hinders it from increasing so fast as it

quantity, but to alter the quality and shape of a part of the manufactures of Great Britain, and to accommodate to a market, from

would otherwise increase, and consequently from maintaining a
still greater quantity of productive labour, and affording a still

which the returns are slow and distant, what would otherwise have

greater revenue to the industrious inhabitants of that country. One

495

The Wealth of Nations
great original source of revenue, therefore, the wages of labour,
the monopoly must necessarily have rendered, at all times, less

interest falls. The monopoly, therefore, hurts the interest of the
landlord two different ways, by retarding the natural increase, first,

abundant than it otherwise would have been.
By raising the rate of mercantile profit, the monopoly discour-

of his rent, and, secondly, of the price which he would get for his
land, in proportion to the rent which it affords.

ages the improvement of land. The profit of improvement depends upon the difference between what the land actually pro-

The monopoly, indeed, raises the rate of mercantile profit and
thereby augments somewhat the gain of our merchants. But as it

duces, and what, by the application of a certain capital, it can be
made to produce. If this difference affords a greater profit than

obstructs the natural increase of capital, it tends rather to diminish than to increase the sum total of the revenue which the inhab-

what can be drawn from an equal capital in any mercantile employment, the improvement of land will draw capital from all

itants of the country derive from the profits of stock; a small profit
upon a great capital generally affording a greater revenue than a

mercantile employments. If the profit is less, mercantile employments will draw capital from the improvement of land. Whatever,

great profit upon a small one. The monopoly raises the rate of
profit, but it hinders the sum of profit from rising so high as it

therefore, raises the rate of mercantile profit, either lessens the
superiority, or increases the inferiority of the profit of improve-

otherwise would do.
All the original sources of revenue, the wages of labour, the rent

ment: and, in the one case, hinders capital from going to improvement, and in the other draws capital from it; but by discouraging

of land, and the profits of stock, the monopoly renders much less
abundant than they otherwise would be. To promote the little

improvement, the monopoly necessarily retards the natural increase of another great original source of revenue, the rent of land.

interest of one little order of men in one country, it hurts the
interest of all other orders of men in that country, and of all the

By raising the rate of profit, too, the monopoly necessarily keeps
up the market rate of interest higher than it otherwise would be.

men in all other countries.
It is solely by raising the ordinary rate of profit, that the mo-

But the price of land, in proportion to the rent which it affords,
the number of years purchase which is commonly paid for it, nec-

nopoly either has proved, or could prove, advantageous to any
one particular order of men. But besides all the bad effects to the

essarily falls as the rate of interest rises, and rises as the rate of

country in general, which have already been mentioned as neces-

496

Adam Smith
sarily resulting from a higher rate of profit, there is one more fatal,
perhaps, than all these put together, but which, if we may judge

chants of Cadiz and Lisbon augmented the capital of Spain and
Portugal? Have they alleviated the poverty, have they promoted

from experience, is inseparably connected with it. The high rate
of profit seems everywhere to destroy that parsimony which, in

the industry, of those two beggarly countries? Such has been the
tone of mercantile expense in those two trading cities, that those

other circumstances, is natural to the character of the merchant.
When profits are high, that sober virtue seems to be superfluous,

exorbitant profits, far from augmenting the general capital of the
country, seem scarce to have been sufficient to keep up the capi-

and expensive luxury to suit better the affluence of his situation.
But the owners of the great mercantile capitals are necessarily the

tals upon which they were made. Foreign capitals are every day
intruding themselves, if I may say so, more and more into the

leaders and conductors of the whole industry of every nation; and
their example has a much greater influence upon the manners of

trade of Cadiz and Lisbon. It is to expel those foreign capitals
from a trade which their own grows every day more and more

the whole industrious part of it than that of any other order of
men. If his employer is attentive and parsimonious, the workman

insufficient for carrying on, that the Spaniards and Portuguese
endeavour every day to straiten more and more the galling bands

is very likely to be so too; but if the master is dissolute and disorderly, the servant, who shapes his work according to the pattern

of their absurd monopoly. Compare the mercantile manners of
Cadiz and Lisbon with those of Amsterdam, and you will be sen-

which his master prescribes to him, will shape his life, too, according to the example which he sets him. Accumulation is thus pre-

sible how differently the conduct and character of merchants are
affected by the high and by the low profits of stock. The mer-

vented in the hands of all those who are naturally the most disposed to accumulate; and the funds destined for the maintenance

chants of London, indeed, have not yet generally become such
magnificent lords as those of Cadiz and Lisbon; but neither are

of productive labour, receive no augmentation from the revenue
of those who ought naturally to augment them the most. The

they in general such attetitive and parsimonious burghers as those
of Amsterdam. They are supposed, however, many of them, to be

capital of the country, instead of increasing, gradually dwindles
away, and the quantity of productive labour maintained in it grows

a good deal richer than the greater part of the former, and not
quire so rich as many of the latter: but the rate of their profit is

every day less and less. Have the exorbitant profits of the mer-

commonly much lower than that of the former, and a good deal

497

The Wealth of Nations
higher than that of the latter. Light come, light go, says the proverb; and the ordinary tone of expense seems everywhere to be regu-

price, indeed, was very small, and instead of thirty years purchase,
the ordinary price of land in the present times, it amounted to

lated, not so much according to the real ability of spending, as to
the supposed facility of getting money to spend.

little more than the expense of the different equipments which
made the first discovery, reconnoitered the coast, and took a ficti-

It is thus that the single advantage which the monopoly procures to a single order of men, is in many different ways hurtful to

tious possession of the country. The land was good, and of great
extent; and the cultivators having plenty of good ground to work

the general interest of the country.
To found a great empire for the sole purpose of raising up a

upon, and being for some time at liberty to sell their produce
where they pleased, became, in the course of little more than thirty

people of customers, may at first sight, appear a project fit only
for a nation of shopkeepers. It is, however, a project altogether

or forty years (between 1620 and 1660), so numerous and thriving a people, that the shopkeepers and other traders of England

unfit for a nation of shopkeepers, but extremely fit for a nation
whose government is influenced by shopkeepers. Such statesmen,

wished to secure to themselves the monopoly of their custom.
Without pretending, therefore, that they had paid any part, either

and such statesmen only, are capable of fancying that they will
find some advantage in employing the blood and treasure of their

of the original purchase money, or of the subsequent expense of
improvement, they petitioned the parliament, that the cultivators

fellow-citizens, to found and maintain such an empire. Say to a
shopkeeper, Buy me a good estate, and I shall always buy my clothes

of America might for the future be confined to their shop; first,
for buying all the goods which they wanted from Europe; and,

at your shop, even though I should pay somewhat dearer than
what I can have them for at other shops; and you will not find

secondly, for selling all such parts of their own produce as those
traders might find it convenient to buy. For they did not find it

him very forward to embrace your proposal. But should any other
person buy you such an estate, the shopkeeper will be much obliged

convenient to buy every part of it. Some parts of it imported into
England, might have interfered with some of the trades which

to your benefactor if he would enjoin you to buy all your clothes
at his shop. England purchased for some of her subjects, who found

they themselves carried on at home. Those particular parts of it,
therefore, they were willing that the colonists should sell where

themselves uneasy at home, a great estate in a distant country. The

they could; the farther off the better; and upon that account pro-

498

Adam Smith
posed that their market should be confined to the countries south
of Cape Finisterre. A clause in the famous act of navigation estab-

at the same time, the smallest part of what the dominion of the
colonies has cost the mother country. If we would know the amount

lished this truly shopkeeper proposal into a law.
The maintenance of this monopoly has hitherto been the prin-

of the whole, we must add to the annual expense of this peace
establishment, the interest of the sums which, in consequence of

cipal, or more properly, perhaps, the sole end and purpose of the
dominion which Great Britain assumes over her colonies. In the

their considering her colonies as provinces subject to her dominion, Great Britain has, upon different occasions, laid out upon

exclusive trade, it is supposed, consists the great advantage of provinces, which have never yet afforded either revenue or military

their defence. We must add to it, in particular, the whole expense
of the late war, and a great part of that of the war which preceded

force for the support of the civil government, or the defence of the
mother country. The monopoly is the principal badge of their

it. The late war was altogether a colony quarrel; and the whole
expense of it, in whatever part of the world it might have been laid

dependency, and it is the sole fruit which has hitherto been gathered from that dependency. Whatever expense Great Britain has

out, whether in Germany or the East Indies, ought justly to be
stated to the account of the colonies. It amounted to more than

hitherto laid out in maintaining this dependency, has really been
laid out in order to support this monopoly. The expense of the

ninety millions sterling, including not only the new debt which
was contracted, but the two shillings in the pound additional land

ordinary peace establishment of the colonies amounted, before
the commencement of the present disturbances to the pay of twenty

tax, and the sums which were every year borrowed from the sinking fund. The Spanish war which began in 1739 was principally a

regiments of foot; to the expense of the artillery, stores, and extraordinary provisions, with which it was necessary to supply them;

colony quarrel. Its principal object was to prevent the search of
the colony ships, which carried on a contraband trade with the

and to the expense of a very considerable naval force, which was
constantly kept up, in order to guard from the smuggling vessels

Spanish Main. This whole expense is, in reality, a bounty which
has been given in order to support a monopoly. The pretended

of other nations, the immense coast of North America, and that
of our West Indian islands. The whole expense of this peace estab-

purpose of it was to encourage the manufactures, and to increase
the commerce of Great Britain. But its real effect has been to raise

lishment was a charge upon the revenue of Great Britain, and was,

the rate of mercantile profit, and to enable our merchants to turn

499

The Wealth of Nations
into a branch of trade, of which the returns are more slow and
distant than those of the greater part of other trades, a greater

turbulent, and, to the great body of the people, the most unprofitable province, seldom fails to afford. The most visionary enthu-

proportion of their capital than they otherwise would have done;
two events which, if a bounty could have prevented, it might per-

siasts would scarce be capable of proposing such a measure, with
any serious hopes at least of its ever being adopted. If it was adopted,

haps have been very well worth while to give such a bounty.
Under the present system of management, therefore, Great Brit-

however, Great Britain would not only be immediately freed from
the whole annual expense of the peace establishment of the colo-

ain derives nothing but loss from the dominion which she assumes over her colonies.

nies, but might settle with them such a treaty of commerce as
would effectually secure to her a free trade, more advantageous to

To propose that Great Britain should voluntarily give up all authority over her colonies, and leave them to elect their own magis-

the great body of the people, though less so to the merchants,
than the monopoly which she at present enjoys. By thus parting

trates, to enact their own laws, and to make peace and war, as they
might think proper, would be to propose such a measure as never

good friends, the natural affection of the colonies to the mother
country, which, perhaps, our late dissensions have well nigh ex-

was, and never will be, adopted by any nation in the world. No
nation ever voluntarily gave up the dominion of any province,

tinguished, would quickly revive. It might dispose them not only
to respect, for whole centuries together, that treaty of commerce

how troublesome soever it might be to govern it, and how small
soever the revenue which it afforded might be in proportion to

which they had concluded with us at parting, but to favour us in
war as well as in trade, and instead of turbulent and factious sub-

the expense which it occasioned. Such sacrifices, though they might
frequently be agreeable to the interest, are always mortifying to

jects, to become our most faithful, affectionate, and generous allies; and the same sort of parental affection on the one side, and

the pride of every nation; and, what is perhaps of still greater consequence, they are always contrary to the private interest of the

filial respect on the other, might revive between Great Britain and
her colonies, which used to subsist between those of ancient Greece

governing part of it, who would thereby be deprived of the disposal of many places of trust and profit, of many opportunities of

and the mother city from which they descended.
In order to render any province advantageous to the empire to

acquiring wealth and distinction, which the possession of the most

which it belongs, it ought to afford, in time of peace, a revenue to

500

Adam Smith
the public, sufficient not only for defraying the whole expense of
its own peace establishment, but for contributing its proportion

too, whose revenue the monopoly increases, constitute a particular order, which it is both absolutely impossible to tax beyond the

to the support of the general government of the empire. Every
province necessarily contributes, more or less, to increase the ex-

proportion of other orders, and extremely impolitic even to attempt to tax beyond that proportion, as I shall endeavour to show

pense of that general government. If any particular province, therefore, does not contribute its share towards defraying this expense,

in the following book. No particular resource, therefore, can be
drawn from this particular order.

an unequal burden must be thrown upon some other part of the
empire. The extraordinary revenue, too, which every province af-

The colonies may be taxed either by their own assemblies, or by
the parliament of Great Britain.

fords to the public in time of war, ought, from parity of reason, to
bear the same proportion to the extraordinary revenue of the whole

That the colony assemblies can never be so managed as to levy
upon their constituents a public revenue, sufficient, not only to

empire, which its ordinary revenue does in time of peace. That
neither the ordinary nor extraordinary revenue which Great Brit-

maintain at all times their own civil and military establishment,
but to pay their proper proportion of the expense of the general

ain derives from her colonies, bears this proportion to the whole
revenue of the British empire, will readily be allowed. The mo-

government of the British empire, seems not very probable. It was
a long time before even the parliament of England, though placed

nopoly, it has been supposed, indeed, by increasing the private
revenue of the people of Great Britain, and thereby enabling them

immediately under the eye of the sovereign, could be brought under
such a system of management, or could be rendered sufficiently

to pay greater taxes, compensates the deficiency of the public revenue of the colonies. But this monopoly, I have endeavoured to

liberal in their grants for supporting the civil and military establishments even of their own country. It was only by distributing

show, though a very grievous tax upon the colonies, and though it
may increase the revenue of a particular order of men in Great

among the particular members of parliament a great part either of
the offices, or of the disposal of the offices arising from this civil

Britain, diminishes, instead of increasing, that of the great body
of the people, and consequently diminishes, instead of increasing,

and military establishment, that such a system of management
could be established, even with regard to the parliament of En-

the ability of the great body of the people to pay taxes. The men,

gland. But the distance of the colony assemblies from the eye of

501

The Wealth of Nations
the sovereign, their number, their dispersed situation, and their
various constitutions, would render it very difficult to manage

affairs of its own particular district, but can have no proper means
of judging concerning those of the whole empire. It cannot even

them in the same manner, even though the sovereign had the same
means of doing it; and those means are wanting. It would be abso-

judge properly concerning the proportion which its own province
bears to the whole empire, or concerning the relative degree of its

lutely impossible to distribute among all the leading members of
all the colony assemblies such a share, either of the offices, or of

wealth and importance, compared with the other provinces; because those other provinces are not under the inspection and su-

the disposal of the offices, arising from the general government of
the British empire, as to dispose them to give up their popularity

perintendency of the assembly of a particular province. What is
necessary for the defence and support of the whole empire, and in

at home, and to tax their constituents for the support of that general government, of which almost the whole emoluments were to

what proportion each part ought to contribute, can be judged of
only by that assembly which inspects and super-intends the affairs

be divided among people who were strangers to them. The unavoidable ignorance of administration, besides, concerning the

of the whole empire.
It has been proposed, accordingly, that the colonies should be

relative importance of the different members of those different
assemblies, the offences which must frequently be given, the blun-

taxed by requisition, the parliament of Great Britain determining
the sum which each colony ought to pay, and the provincial as-

ders which must constantly be committed, in attempting to manage them in this manner, seems to render such a system of man-

sembly assessing and levying it in the way that suited best the
circumstances of the province. What concerned the whole empire

agement altogether impracticable with regard to them.
The colony assemblies, besides, cannot be supposed the proper

would in this way be determined by the assembly which inspects
and superintends the affairs of the whole empire; and the provin-

judges of what is necessary for the defence and support of the
whole empire. The care of that defence and support is not en-

cial affairs of each colony might still be regulated by its own assembly. Though the colonies should, in this case, have no repre-

trusted to them. It is not their business, and they have no regular
means of information concerning it. The assembly of a province,

sentatives in the British parliament, yet, if we may judge by experience, there is no probability that the parliamentary requisition

like the vestry of a parish, may judge very properly concerning the

would be unreasonable. The parliament of England has not, upon

502

Adam Smith
any occasion, shewn the smallest disposition to overburden those
parts of the empire which are not represented in parliament. The

proper. According to the scheme of taxing by requisition, the parliament of Great Britain would stand nearly in the same situation

islands of Guernsey and Jersey, without any means of resisting the
authority of parliament, are more lightly taxed than any part of

towards the colony assemblies, as the king of France does towards
the states of those provinces which still enjoy the privilege of hav-

Great Britain. Parliament, in attempting to exercise its supposed
right, whether well or ill grounded, of taxing the colonies, has

ing states of their own, the provinces of France which are supposed to be the best governed.

never hitherto demanded of them anything which even approached
to a just proportion to what was paid by their fellow subjects at

But though, according to this scheme, the colonies could have
no just reason to fear that their share of the public burdens should

home. If the contribution of the colonies, besides, was to rise or
fall in proportion to the rise or fall of the land-tax, parliament

ever exceed the proper proportion to that of their fellow-citizens
at home, Great Britain might have just reason to fear that it never

could not tax them without taxing, at the same time, its own constituents, and the colonies might, in this case, be considered as

would amount to that proper proportion. The parliament of Great
Britain has not, for some time past, had the same established au-

virtually represented in parliament.
Examples are not wanting of empires in which all the different

thority in the colonies, which the French king has in those provinces of France which still enjoy the privilege of having states of

provinces are not taxed, if I may be allowed the expression, in one
mass; but in which the sovereign regulates the sum which each

their own. The colony assemblies, if they were not very favourably
disposed (and unless more skilfully managed than they ever have

province ought to pay, and in some provinces assesses and levies it
as he thinks proper; while in others he leaves it to be assessed and

been hitherto, they are not very likely to be so), might still find
many pretences for evading or rejecting the most reasonable req-

levied as the respective states of each province shall determine. In
some provinces of France, the king not only imposes what taxes

uisitions of parliament. A French war breaks out, we shall suppose; ten millions must immediately be raised, in order to defend

he thinks proper, but assesses and levies them in the way he thinks
proper. From others he demands a certain sum, but leaves it to the

the seat of the empire. This sum must be borrowed upon the credit
of some parliamentary fund mortgaged for paying the interest.

states of each province to assess and levy that sum as they think

Part of this fund parliament proposes to raise by a tax to be levied

503

The Wealth of Nations
in Great Britain; and part of it by a requisition to all the different
colony assemblies of America and the West Indies. Would people

tions immediately effectual, in case the colony assemblies should
attempt to evade or reject them; and what those means are, it is

readily advance their money upon the credit of a fund which partly
depended upon the good humour of all those assemblies, far dis-

not very easy to conceive, and it has not yet been explained.
Should the parliament of Great Britain, at the same time, be

tant from the seat of the war, and sometimes, perhaps, thinking
themselves not much concerned in the event of it? Upon such a

ever fully established in the right of taxing the colonies, even independent of the consent of their own assemblies, the importance of

fund, no more money would probably be advanced than what the
tax to be levied in Great Britain might be supposed to answer for.

those assemblies would, from that moment, be at an end, and
with it, that of all the leading men of British America. Men desire

The whole burden of the debt contracted on account of the war
would in this manner fall, as it always has done hitherto, upon

to have some share in the management of public affairs, chiefly on
account of the importance which it gives them. Upon the power

Great Britain; upon a part of the empire, and not upon the whole
empire. Great Britain is, perhaps, since the world began, the only

which the greater part of the leading men, the natural aristocracy
of every country, have of preserving or defending their respective

state which, as it has extended its empire, has only increased its
expense, without once augmenting its resources. Other states have

importance, depends the stability and duration of every system of
free government. In the attacks which those leading men are con-

generally disburdened themselves, upon their subject and subordinate provinces, of the most considerable part of the expense of

tinually making upon the importance of one another, and in the
defence of their own, consists the whole play of domestic faction

defending the empire. Great Britain has hitherto suffered her subject and subordinate provinces to disburden themselves upon her

and ambition. The leading men of America, like those of all other
countries, desire to preserve their own importance. They feel, or

of almost this whole expense. In order to put Great Britain upon a
footing of equality with her own colonies, which the law has hith-

imagine, that if their assemblies, which they are fond of calling
parliaments, and of considering as equal in authority to the par-

erto supposed to be subject and subordinate, it seems necessary,
upon the scheme of taxing them by parliamentary requisition,

liament of Great Britain, should be so far degraded as to become
the humble ministers and executive officers of that parliament,

that parliament should have some means of rendering its requisi-

the greater part of their own importance would be at an end. They

504

Adam Smith
have rejected, therefore, the proposal of being taxed by parliamentary requisition, and, like other ambitious and high-spirited men,

dling for the little prizes which are to be found in what may be
called the paltry raffle of colony faction, they might then hope,

have rather chosen to draw the sword in defence of their own
importance.

from the presumption which men naturally have in their own
ability and good fortune, to draw some of the great prizes which

Towards the declension of the Roman republic, the allies of
Rome, who had borne the principal burden of defending the state

sometimes come from the wheel of the great state lottery of British politics. Unless this or some other method is fallen upon, and

and extending the empire, demanded to be admitted to all the
privileges of Roman citizens. Upon being refused, the social war

there seems to be none more obvious than this, of preserving the
importance and of gratifying the ambition of the leading men of

broke out. During the course of that war, Rome granted those
privileges to the greater part of them, one by one, and in propor-

America, it is not very probable that they will ever voluntarily
submit to us; and we ought to consider, that the blood which

tion as they detached themselves from the general confederacy.
The parliament of Great Britain insists upon taxing the colonies;

must be shed in forcing them to do so, is, every drop of it, the
blood either of those who are, or of those whom we wish to have

and they refuse to be taxed by a parliament in which they are not
represented. If to each colony which should detach itself from the

for our fellow citizens. They are very weak who flatter themselves
that, in the state to which things have come, our colonies will be

general confederacy, Great Britain should allow such a number of
representatives as suited the proportion of what it contributed to

easily conquered by force alone. The persons who now govern the
resolutions of what they call their continental congress, feel in

the public revenue of the empire, in consequence of its being subjected to the same taxes, and in compensation admitted to the

themselves at this moment a degree of importance which, perhaps, the greatest subjects in Europe scarce feel. From shopkeep-

same freedom of trade with its fellow-subjects at home; the number of its representatives to be augmented as the proportion of its

ers, trades men, and attorneys, they are become statesmen and
legislators, and are employed in contriving a new form of govern-

contribution might afterwards augment; a new method of acquiring importance, a new and more dazzling object of ambition, would

ment for an extensive empire, which, they flatter themselves, will
become, and which, indeed, seems very likely to become, one of

be presented to the leading men of each colony. Instead of pid-

the greatest and most formidable that ever was in the world. Five

505

The Wealth of Nations
hundred different people, perhaps, who, in different ways, act
immediately under the continental congress, and five hundred

defence of their own importance, which, they foresaw, was to be
at an end whenever the ancient government should be re-estab-

thousand, perhaps, who act under those five hundred, all feel, in
the same manner, a proportionable rise in their own importance.

lished. Our colonies, unless they can be induced to consent to a
union, are very likely to defend themselves, against the best of all

Almost every individual of the governing party in America fills, at
present, in his own fancy, a station superior, not only to what he

mother countries, as obstinately as the city of Paris did against one
of the best of kings.

had ever filled before, but to what he had ever expected to fill; and
unless some new object of ambition is presented either to him or

The idea of representation was unknown in ancient times. When
the people of one state were admitted to the right of citizenship in

to his leaders, if he has the ordinary spirit of a man, he will die in
defence of that station.

another, they had no other means of exercising that right, but by
coming in a body to vote and deliberate with the people of that

It is a remark of the President Heynaut, that we now read with
pleasure the account of many little transactions of the Ligue, which,

other state. The admission of the greater part of the inhabitants of
Italy to the privileges of Roman citizens, completely ruined the

when they happened, were not, perhaps, considered as very important pieces of news. But everyman then, says he, fancied him-

Roman republic. It was no longer possible to distinguish between
who was, and who was not, a Roman citizen. No tribe could know

self of some importance; and the innumerable memoirs which
have come down to us from those times, were the greater part of

its own members. A rabble of any kind could be introduced into
the assemblies of the people, could drive out the real citizens, and

them written by people who took pleasure in recording and magnifying events, in which they flattered themselves they had been

decide upon the affairs of the republic, as if they themselves had
been such. But though America were to send fifty or sixty new

considerable actors. How obstinately the city of Paris, upon that
occasion, defended itself, what a dreadful famine it supported,

representatives to parliament, the door-keeper of the house of commons could not find any great difficulty in distinguishing between

rather than submit to the best, and afterwards the most beloved of
all the French kings, is well known. The greater part of the citi-

who was and who was not a member. Though the Roman constitution, therefore, was necessarily ruined by the union of Rome

zens, or those who governed the greater part of them, fought in

with the allied states of Italy, there is not the least probability that

506

Adam Smith
the British constitution would be hurt by the union of Great Britain with her colonies. That constitution, on the contrary, would

had done before.
The people on the other side of the water are afraid lest their

be completed by it, and seems to be imperfect without it. The
assembly which deliberates and decides concerning the affairs of

distance from the seat of government might expose them to many
oppressions; but their representatives in parliament, of which the

every part of the empire, in order to be properly informed, ought
certainly to have representatives from every part of it. That this

number ought from the first to be considerable, would easily be
able to protect them from all oppression. The distance could not

union, however, could be easily effectuated, or that difficulties,
and great difficulties, might not occur in the execution, I do not

much weaken the dependency of the representative upon the constituent, and the former would still feel that he owed his seat in

pretend. I have yet heard of none, however, which appear insurmountable. The principal, perhaps, arise, not from the nature of

parliament, and all the consequence which he derived from it, to
the good-will of the latter. It would be the interest of the former,

things, but from the prejudices and opinions of the people, both
on this and on the other side of the Atlantic.

therefore, to cultivate that good-will, by complaining, with all the
authority of a member of the legislature, of every outrage which

We on this side the water are afraid lest the multitude of American representatives should overturn the balance of the constitu-

any civil or military officer might be guilty of in those remote
parts of the empire. The distance of America from the seat of

tion, and increase too much either the influence of the crown on
the one hand, or the force of the democracy on the other. But if

government, besides, the natives of that country might flatter themselves, with some appearance of reason too, would not be of very

the number of American representatives were to be in proportion
to the produce of American taxation, the number of people to be

long continuance. Such has hitherto been the rapid progress of
that country in wealth, population, and improvement, that in the

managed would increase exactly in proportion to the means of
managing them, and the means of managing to the number of

course of little more than a century, perhaps, the produce of the
American might exceed that of the British taxation. The seat of

people to be managed. The monarchical and democratical parts
of the constitution would, after the union, stand exactly in the

the empire would then naturally remove itself to that part of the
empire which contributed most to the general defence and sup-

same degree of relative force with regard to one another as they

port of the whole.

507

The Wealth of Nations
The discovery of America, and that of a passage to the East
Indies by the Cape of Good Hope, are the two greatest and most

ants of all the different quarters of the world may arrive at that
equality of courage and force which, by inspiring mutual fear, can

important events recorded in the history of mankind. Their consequences have already been great; but, in the short period of be-

alone overawe the injustice of independent nations into some sort
of respect for the rights of one another. But nothing seems more

tween two and three centuries which has elapsed since these discoveries were made, it is impossible that the whole extent of their

likely to establish this equality of force, than that mutual communication of knowledge, and of all sorts of improvements, which

consequences can have been seen. What benefits or what misfortunes to mankind may hereafter result from those great events, no

an extensive commerce from all countries to all countries naturally, or rather necessarily, carries along with it.

human wisdom can foresee. By uniting in some measure the most
distant parts of the world, by enabling them to relieve one another’s

In the mean time, one of the principal effects of those discoveries has been, to raise the mercantile system to a degree of splendour

wants, to increase one another’s enjoyments, and to encourage
one another’s industry, their general tendency would seem to be

and glory which it could never otherwise have attained to. It is the
object of that system to enrich a great nation, rather by trade and

beneficial. To the natives, however, both of the East and West
Indies, all the commercial benefits which can have resulted from

manufactures than by the improvement and cultivation of land,
rather by the industry of the towns than by that of the country.

those events have been sunk and lost in the dreadful misfortunes
which they have occasioned. These misfortunes, however, seem to

But in consequence of those discoveries, the commercial towns of
Europe, instead of being the manufacturers and carriers for but a

have arisen rather from accident than from any thing in the nature of those events themselves. At the particular time when these

very small part of the world (that part of Europe which is washed
by the Atlantic ocean, and the countries which lie round the Bal-

discoveries were made, the superiority of force happened to be so
great on the side of the Europeans, that they were enabled to com-

tic and Mediterranean seas), have now become the manufacturers
for the numerous and thriving cultivators of America, and the

mit with impunity every sort of injustice in those remote countries. Hereafter, perhaps, the natives of those countries may grow

carriers, and in some respects the manufacturers too, for almost
all the different nations of Asia, Africa, and America. Two new

stronger, or those of Europe may grow weaker; and the inhabit-

worlds have been opened to their industry, each of them much

508

Adam Smith
greater and more extensive than the old one, and the market of
one of them growing still greater and greater every day.

than to those against which they are established. The unjust oppression of the industry of other countries falls back, if I may say

The countries which possess the colonies of America, and which
trade directly to the East Indies, enjoy indeed the whole show and

so, upon the heads of the oppressors, and crushes their industry
more than it does that of those other countries. By those regula-

splendour of this great commerce. Other countries, however, notwithstanding all the invidious restraints by which it is meant to

tions, for example, the merchant of Hamburg must send the linen
which he destines for the American market to London, and he

exclude them, frequently enjoy a greater share of the real benefit
of it. The colonies of Spain and. Portugal, for example, give more

must bring back from thence the tobacco which he destines for
the German market; because he can neither send the one directly

real encouragement to the industry of other countries than to that
of Spain and Portugal. In the single article of linen alone, the con-

to America, nor bring the other directly from thence. By this restraint he is probably obliged to sell the one somewhat cheaper,

sumption of those colonies amounts, it is said (but I do not pretend to warrant the quantity ), to more than three millions ster-

and to buy the other somewhat dearer, than he otherwise might
have done; and his profits are probably somewhat abridged by

ling a-year. But this great consumption is almost entirely supplied
by France, Flanders, Holland, and Germany. Spain and Portugal

means of it. In this trade, however, between Hamburg and London, he certainly receives the returns of his capital much more

furnish but a small part of it. The capital which supplies the colonies with this great quantity of linen, is annually distributed among,

quickly than he could possibly have done in the direct trade to
America, even though we should suppose, what is by no means

and furnishes a revenue to, the inhabitants of those other countries. The profits of it only are spent in Spain and Portugal, where

the case, that the payments of America were as punctual as those
of London. In the trade, therefore, to which those regulations con-

they help to support the sumptuous profusion of the merchants
of Cadiz and Lisbon.

fine the merchant of Hamburg, his capital can keep in constant
employment a much greater quantity of German industry than he

Even the regulations by which each nation endeavours to secure
to itself the exclusive trade of its own colonies, are frequently more

possibly could have done in the trade from which he is excluded.
Though the one employment, therefore, may to him perhaps be

hurtful to the countries in favour of which they are established,

less profitable than the other, it cannot be less advantageous to his

509

The Wealth of Nations
country. It is quite otherwise with the employment into which the
monopoly naturally attracts, if I may say so, the capital of the

the country than the greater part of other employments, absorb a
much greater proportion of the capital of the country than what

London merchant. That employment may, perhaps, be more profitable to him than the greater part of other employments; but on

would otherwise have gone to it.
The mercantile stock of every country, it has been shown in the

account of the slowness of the returns, it cannot be more advantageous to his country.

second book, naturally seeks, if one may say so, the employment
most advantageous to that country. If it is employed in the carry-

After all the unjust attempts, therefore, of every country in Europe to engross to itself the whole advantage of the trade of its

ing trade, the country to which it belongs becomes the emporium
of the goods of all the countries whose trade that stock carries on.

own colonies, no country has yet been able to engross to itself any
thing but the expense of supporting in time of peace, and of de-

But the owner of that stock necessarily wishes to dispose of as
great a part of those goods as he can at home. He thereby saves

fending in time of war, the oppressive authority which it assumes
over them. The inconveniencies resulting from the possession of

himself the trouble, risk, and expense of exportation; and he will
upon that account be glad to sell them at home, not only for a

its colonies, every country has engrossed to itself completely. The
advantages resulting from their trade, it has been obliged to share

much smaller price, but with somewhat a smaller profit, than he
might expect to make by sending them abroad. He naturally, there-

with many other countries.
At first sight, no doubt, the monopoly of the great commerce of

fore, endeavours as much as he can to turn his carrying trade into
a foreign trade of consumption, If his stock, again, is employed in

America naturally seems to be an acquisition of the highest value.
To the undiscerning eye of giddy ambition it naturally presents

a foreign trade of consumption, he will, for the same reason, be
glad to dispose of, at home, as great a part as he can of the home

itself, amidst the confused scramble of politics and war, as a very
dazzling object to fight for. The dazzling splendour of the object,

goods which he collects in order to export to some foreign market, and he will thus endeavour, as much as he can, to turn his

however, the immense greatness of the commerce, is the very quality
which renders the monopoly of it hurtful, or which makes one

foreign trade of consumption into a home trade. The mercantile
stock of every country naturally courts in this manner the near,

employment, in its own nature necessarily less advantageous to

and shuns the distant employment: naturally courts the employ-

510

Adam Smith
ment in which the returns are frequent, and shuns that in which
they are distant and slow; naturally courts the employment in which

naturally does take place, among all the different classes of them.
Though the same capital never will maintain the same quantity of

it can maintain the greatest quantity of productive labour in the
country to which it belongs, or in which its owner resides, and

productive labour in a distant as in a near employment, yet a distant employment maybe as necessary for the welfare of the society

shuns that in which it can maintain there the smallest quantity. It
naturally courts the employment which in ordinary cases is most

as a near one; the goods which the distant employment deals in
being necessary, perhaps, for carrying on many of the nearer em-

advantageous, and shuns that which in ordinary cases is least advantageous to that country.

ployments. But if the profits of those who deal in such goods are
above their proper level, those goods will be sold dearer than they

But if, in any one of those distant employments, which in ordinary cases are less advantageous to the country, the profit should

ought to be, or somewhat above their natural price, and all those
engaged in the nearer employments will be more or less oppressed

happen to rise somewhat higher than what is sufficient to balance
the natural preference which is given to nearer employments, this

by this high price. Their interest, therefore, in this case, requires,
that some stock should be withdrawn from those nearer employ-

superiority of profit will draw stock from those nearer employments, till the profits of all return to their proper level. This supe-

ments, and turned towards that distant one, in order to reduce its
profits to their proper level, and the price of the goods which it

riority of profit, however, is a proof that, in the actual circumstances of the society, those distant employments are somewhat

deals in to their natural price. In this extraordinary case, the public interest requires that some stock should be withdrawn from

understocked in proportion to other employments, and that the
stock of the society is not distributed in the properest manner

those employments which, in ordinary cases, are more advantageous, and turned towards one which, in ordinary cases, is less

among all the different employments carried on in it. It is a proof
that something is either bought cheaper or sold dearer than it

advantageous to the public; and, in this extraordinary case, the
natural interests and inclinations of men coincide as exactly with

ought to be, and that some particular class of citizens is more or
less oppressed, either by paying more, or by getting less than what

the public interests as in all other ordinary cases, and lead them to
withdraw stock from the near, and to turn it towards the distant

is suitable to that equality which ought to take place, and which

employments.

511

The Wealth of Nations
It is thus that the private interests and passions of individuals
naturally dispose them to turn their stock towards the employ-

In the trade to America, every nation endeavours to engross as
much as possible the whole market of its own colonies, by fairly

ments which in ordinary cases, are most advantageous to the society. But if from this natural preference they should turn too much

excluding all other nations from any direct trade to them. During
the greater part of the sixteenth century, the Portuguese endeav-

of it towards those employments, the fall of profit in them, and
the rise of it in all others, immediately dispose them to alter this

oured to manage the trade to the East Indies in the same manner,
by claiming the sole right of sailing in the Indian seas, on account

faulty distribution. Without any intervention of law, therefore,
the private interests and passions of men naturally lead them to

of the merit of having first found out the road to them. The Dutch
still continue to exclude all other European nations from any di-

divide and distribute the stock of every society among all the different employments carried on in it; as nearly as possible in the

rect trade to their spice islands. Monopolies of this kind are evidently established against all other European nations, who are

proportion which is most agreeable to the interest of the whole
society.

thereby not only excluded from a trade to which it might be convenient for them to turn some part of their stock, but are obliged

All the different regulations of the mercantile system necessarily
derange more or less this natural and most advantageous distribu-

to buy the goods which that trade deals in, somewhat dearer than
if they could import them themselves directly from the countries

tion of stock. But those which concern the trade to America and
the East Indies derange it, perhaps, more than any other; because

which produced them.
But since the fall of the power of Portugal, no European nation

the trade to those two great continents absorbs a greater quantity
of stock than any two other branches of trade. The regulations,

has claimed the exclusive right of sailing in the Indian seas, of
which the principal ports are now open to the ships of all Euro-

however, by which this derangement is effected in those two different branches of trade, are not altogether the same. Monopoly is

pean nations. Except in Portugal, however, and within these few
years in France, the trade to the East Indies has, in every European

the great engine of both; but it is a different sort of monopoly.
Monopoly of one kind or another, indeed, seems to be the sole

country, been subjected to an exclusive company. Monopolies of
this kind are properly established against the very nation which

engine of the mercantile system.

erects them. The greater part of that nation are thereby not only

512

Adam Smith
excluded from a trade to which it might be convenient for them
to turn some part of their stock, but are obliged to buy the goods

stances. In poor countries, they naturally attract towards that trade
more stock than would otherwise go to it. In rich countries, they

which that trade deals in somewhat dearer than if it was open and
free to all their countrymen. Since the establishment of the En-

naturally repel from it a good deal of stock which would otherwise go to it.

glish East India company, for example, the other inhabitants of
England, over and above being excluded from the trade, must

Such poor countries as Sweden and Denmark, for example,
would probably have never sent a single ship to the East Indies,

have paid, in the price of the East India goods which they have
consumed, not only for all the extraordinary profits which the

had not the trade been subjected to an exclusive company. The
establishment of such a company necessarily encourages adven-

company may have made upon those goods in consequence of
their monopoly, but for all the extraordinary waste which the fraud

turers. Their monopoly secures them against all competitors in
the home market, and they have the same chance for foreign mar-

and abuse inseparable from the management of the affairs of so
great a company must necessarily have occasioned. The absurdity

kets with the traders of other nations. Their monopoly shows them
the certainty of a great profit upon a considerable quantity of goods,

of this second kind of monopoly, therefore, is much more manifest than that of the first.

and the chance of a considerable profit upon a great quantity.
Without such extraordinary encouragement, the poor traders of

Both these kinds of monopolies derange more or less the natural distribution of the stock of the society; but they do not always

such poor countries would probably never have thought of
hazarding their small capitals in so very distant and uncertain an

derange it in the same way.
Monopolies of the first kind always attract to the particular trade

adventure as the trade to the East Indies must naturally have appeared to them.

in which they are established a greater proportion of the stock of
the society than what would go to that trade of its own accord.

Such a rich country as Holland, on the contrary, would probably, in the case of a free trade, send many more ships to the East

Monopolies of the second kind may sometimes attract stock
towards the particular trade in which they are established, and

Indies than it actually does. The limited stock of the Dutch East
India company probably repels from that trade many great mer-

sometimes repel it from that trade, according to different circum-

cantile capitals which would otherwise go to it. The mercantile

513

The Wealth of Nations
capital of Holland is so great, that it is, as it were, continually
overflowing, sometimes into the public funds of foreign coun-

exclusive company, the trade of Sweden and Denmark to the East
Indies would be less than it actually is, or, what perhaps is more

tries, sometimes into loans to private traders and adventurers of
foreign countries, sometimes into the most round-about foreign

probable, would not exist at all, those two countries must likewise
suffer a considerable loss, by part of their capital being drawn into

trades of consumption, and sometimes into the carrying trade. All
near employments being completely filled up, all the capital which

an employment which must be more or less unsuitable to their
present circumstances. Better for them, perhaps, in the present

can be placed in them with any tolerable profit being already placed
in them, the capital of Holland necessarily flows towards the most

circumstances, to buy East India goods of other nations, even
though they should pay somewhat dearer, than to turn so great a

distant employments. The trade to the East Indies, if it were altogether free, would probably absorb the greater part of this redun-

part of their small capital to so very distant a trade, in which the
returns are so very slow, in which that capital can maintain so

dant capital. The East Indies offer a market both for the manufactures of Europe, and for the gold and silver, as well as for the

small a quantity of productive labour at home, where productive
labour is so much wanted, where so little is done, and where so

several other productions of America, greater and more extensive
than both Europe and America put together.

much is to do.
Though without an exclusive company, therefore, a particular

Every derangement of the natural distribution of stock is necessarily hurtful to the society in which it takes place; whether it be

country should not be able to carry on any direct trade to the East
Indies, it will not from thence follow, that such a company ought

by repelling from a particular trade the stock which would otherwise go to it, or by attracting towards a particular trade that which

to be established there, but only that such a country ought not, in
these circumstances, to trade directly to the East Indies. That such

would not otherwise come to it. If, without any exclusive company, the trade of Holland to the East Indies would be greater

companies are not in general necessary for carrying on the East
India trade, is sufficiently demonstrated by the experience of the

than it actually is, that country must suffer a considerable loss, by
part of its capital being excluded from the employment most con-

Portuguese, who enjoyed almost the whole of it for more than a
century together, without any exclusive company.

venient for that port. And, in the same manner, if, without an

No private merchant, it has been said, could well have capital

514

Adam Smith
sufficient to maintain factors and agents in the different ports of
the East Indies, in order to provide goods for the ships which he

which are to be sent out by other merchants who reside in Europe. The settlements which different European nations have ob-

might occasionally send thither; and yet, unless he was able to do
this, the difficulty of finding a cargo might frequently make his

tained in the East Indies, if they were taken from the exclusive
companies to which they at present belong, and put under the

ships lose the season for returning; and the expense of so long a
delay would not only eat up the whole profit of the adventure, but

immediate protection of the sovereign, would render this residence
both safe and easy, at least to the merchants of the particular na-

frequently occasion a very considerable loss. This argument, however, if it proved any thing at all, would prove that no one great

tions to whom those settlements belong. If, at any particular time,
that part of the capital of any country which of its own accord

branch of trade could be carried on without an exclusive company, which is contrary to the experience of all nations. There is

tended and inclined, if I may say so, towards the East India trade,
was not sufficient for carrying on all those different branches of it,

no great branch of trade, in which the capital of any one private
merchant is sufficient for carrying on all the subordinate branches

it would be a proof that, at that particular time, that country was
not ripe for that trade, and that it would do better to buy for some

which must be carried on, in order to carry on the principal one.
But when a nation is ripe for any great branch of trade, some

time, even at a higher price, from other European nations, the
East India goods it had occasion for, than to import them itself

merchants naturally turn their capitals towards the principal, and
some towards the subordinate branches of it; and though all the

directly from the East Indies. What it might lose by the high price
of those goods, could seldom be equal to the loss which it would

different branches of it are in this manner carried on, yet it very
seldom happens that they are all carried on by the capital of one

sustain by the distraction of a large portion of its capital from
other employments more necessary, or more useful, or more suit-

private merchant. If a nation, therefore, is ripe for the East India
trade, a certain portion of its capital will naturally divide itself

able to its circumstances and situation, than a direct trade to the
East Indies.

among all the different branches of that trade. Some of its merchants will find it for their interest to reside in the East Indies, and

Though the Europeans possess many considerable settlements
both upon the coast of Africa and in the East Indies, they have not

to employ their capitals there in providing goods for the ships

yet established, in either of those countries, such numerous and

515

The Wealth of Nations
thriving colonies as those in the islands and continent of America.
Africa, however, as well as several of the countries comprehended

some resemblance to the colonies of America, and are partly inhabited by Portuguese who have been established there for several

under the general name of the East Indies, is inhabited by barbarous nations. But those nations were by no means so weak and

generations. The Dutch settlements at the Cape of Good Hope
and at Batavia, are at present the most considerable colonies which

defenceless as the miserable and helpless Americans; and in proportion to the natural fertility of the countries which they inhab-

the Europeans have established, either in Africa or in the East
Indies; and both those settlements an peculiarly fortunate in their

ited, they were, besides, much more populous. The most barbarous nations either of Africa or of the East Indies, were shepherds;

situation. The Cape of Good Hope was inhabited by a race of
people almost as barbarous, and quite as incapable of defending

even the Hottentots were so. But the natives of every part of
America, except Mexico and Peru, were only hunters and the dif-

themselves, as the natives of America. It is, besides, the half-way
house, if one may say so, between Europe and the East Indies, at

ference is very great between the number of shepherds and that of
hunters whom the same extent of equally fertile territory can main-

which almost every European ship makes some stay, both in going
and returning. The supplying of those ships with every sort of

tain. In Africa and the East Indies, therefore, it was more difficult
to displace the natives, and to extend the European plantations

fresh provisions, with fruit, and sometimes with wine, affords alone
a very extensive market for the surplus produce of the colonies.

over the greater part of the lands of the original inhabitants. The
genius of exclusive companies, besides, is unfavourable, it has al-

What the Cape of Good Hope is between Europe and every part
of the East Indies, Batavia is between the principal countries of

ready been observed, to the growth of new colonies, and has probably been the principal cause of the little progress which they have

the East Indies. It lies upon the most frequented road from Indostan
to China and Japan, and is nearly about mid-way upon that road.

made in the East Indies. The Portuguese carried on the trade both
to Africa and the East Indies, without any exclusive companies;

Almost all the ships too, that sail between Europe and China,
touch at Batavia; and it is, over and above all this, the centre and

and their settlements at Congo, Angola, and Benguela, on the
coast of Africa, and at Goa in the East Indies though much de-

principal mart of what is called the country trade of the East Indies;
not only of that part of it which is carried on by Europeans, but of

pressed by superstition and every sort of bad government, yet bear

that which is carried on by the native Indians; and vessels navi-

516

Adam Smith
gated by the inhabitants of China and Japan, of Tonquin, Malacca, Cochin-China, and the island of Celebes, are frequently to

suited their market, the natives, they suspect, might find means to
convey some part of it to other nations; and the best way, they

be seen in its port. Such advantageous situations have enabled
those two colonies to surmount all the obstacles which the op-

imagine, to secure their own monopoly, is to take care that no
more shall grow than what they themselves carry to market. By

pressive genius of an exclusive company may have occasionally
opposed to their growth. They have enabled Batavia to surmount

different arts of oppression, they have reduced the population of
several of the Moluccas nearly to the number which is sufficient

the additional disadvantage of perhaps the most unwholesome
climate in the world.

to supply with fresh provisions, and other necessaries of life, their
own insignificant garrisons, and such of their ships as occasionally

The English and Dutch companies, though they have established no considerable colonies, except the two above mentioned,

come there for a cargo of spices. Under the government even of
the Portuguese, however, those islands are said to have been toler-

have both made considerable conquests in the East Indies. But in
the manner in which they both govern their new subjects, the

ably well inhabited. The English company have not yet had time
to establish in Bengal so perfectly destructive a system. The plan

natural genius of an exclusive company has shewn itself most distinctly. In the spice islands, the Dutch are said to burn all the

of their government, however, has had exactly the same tendency.
It has not been uncommon, I am well assured, for the chief, that

spiceries which a fertile season produces, beyond what they expect
to dispose of in Europe with such a profit as they think sufficient.

is, the first clerk or a factory, to order a peasant to plough up a rich
field of poppies, and sow it with rice, or some other grain. The

In the islands where they have no settlements, they give a premium to those who collect the young blossoms and green leaves

pretence was, to prevent a scarcity of provisions; but the real reason, to give the chief an opportunity of selling at a better price a

of the clove and nutmeg trees, which naturally grow there, but
which this savage policy has now, it is said, almost completely

large quantity of opium which he happened then to have upon
hand. Upon other occasions, the order has been reversed; and a

extirpated. Even in the islands where they have settlements, they
have very much reduced, it is said, the number of those trees. If

rich field of rice or other grain has been ploughed up, in order to
make room for a plantation of poppies, when the chief foresaw

the produce even of their own islands was much greater than what

that extraordinary profit was likely to be made by opium. The

517

The Wealth of Nations
servants of the company have, upon several occasions, attempted
to establish in their own favour the monopoly of some of the most

tity and value of the produce; and both the one and the other
must depend upon the extent of the market. The quantity will

important branches, not only of the foreign, but of the inland
trade of the country. Had they been allowed to go on, it is impos-

always be suited, with more or less exactness, to the consumption
of those who can afford to pay for it; and the price which they will

sible that they should not, at some time or another, have attempted
to restrain the production of the particular articles of which they

pay will always be in proportion to the eagerness of their competition. It is the interest of such a sovereign, therefore, to open the

had thus usurped the monopoly, not only to the quantity which
they themselves could purchase, but to that which they could ex-

most extensive market for the produce of his country, to allow the
most perfect freedom of commerce, in order to increase as much

pect to sell with such a profit as they might think sufficient. In the
course of a century or two, the policy of the English company

as possible the number and competition of buyers; and upon this
account to abolish, not only all monopolies, but all restraints upon

would, in this manner, have probably proved as completely destructive as that of the Dutch.

the transportation of the home produce from one part of the country to mother, upon its exportation to foreign countries, or upon

Nothing, however, can be more directly contrary to the real interest of those companies, considered as the sovereigns of the coun-

the importation of goods of ’ any kind for which it can be exchanged. He is in this manner most likely to increase both the

tries which they have conquered, than this destructive plan. In
almost all countries, the revenue of the sovereign is drawn from

quantity and value of that produce, and consequently of his own
share of it, or of his own revenue.

that of the people. The greater the revenue of the people, therefore, the greater the annual produce of their land and labour, the

But a company of merchants, are, it seems, incapable of considering themselves as sovereigns, even after they have become such.

more they can afford to the sovereign. It is his interest, therefore,
to increase as much as possible that annual produce. But if this is

Trade, or buying in order to sell again, they still consider as their
principal business, and by a strange absurdity, regard the character

the interest of every sovereign, it is peculiarly so of one whose
revenue, like that of the sovereign of Bengal, arises chiefly from a

of the sovereign as but an appendix to that of the merchant; as
something which ought to be made subservient to it, or by means

land-rent. That rent must necessarily be in proportion to the quan-

of which they may be enabled to buy cheaper in India, and thereby

518

Adam Smith
to sell with a better profit in Europe. They endeavour, for this
purpose, to keep out as much as possible all competitors from the

perhaps incurably faulty, that of its administration in India is still
more so. That administration is necessarily composed of a council

market of the countries which are subject to their government,
and consequently to reduce, at least, some part of the surplus pro-

of merchants, a profession no doubt extremely respectable, but
which in no country in the world carries along with it that sort of

duce of those countries to what is barely sufficient for supplying
their own demand, or to what they can expect to sell in Europe,

authority which naturally overawes the people, and without force
commands their willing obedience. Such a council can command

with such a profit as they may think reasonable. Their mercantile
habits draw them in this manner, almost necessarily, though per-

obedience only by the military force with which they are accompanied; and their government is, therefore, necessarily military

haps insensibly, to prefer, upon all ordinary occasions, the little
and transitory profit of the monopolist to the great and perma-

and despotical. Their proper business, however, is that of merchants. It is to sell, upon their master’s account, the European

nent revenue of the sovereign; and would gradually lead them to
treat the countries subject to their government nearly as the Dutch

goods consigned to them, and to buy, in return, Indian goods for
the European market. It is to sell the one as dear, and to buy the

treat the Moluccas. It is the interest of the East India company,
considered as sovereigns, that the European goods which are car-

other as cheap as possible, and consequently to exclude, as much
as possible, all rivals from the particular market where they keep

ried to their Indian dominions should be sold there as cheap as
possible; and that the Indian goods which are brought from thence

their shop. The genius of the administration, therefore, so far as
concerns the trade of the company, is the same as that of the direc-

should bring there as good a price, or should be sold there as dear
as possible. But the reverse of this is their interest as merchants. As

tion. It tends to make government subservient to the interest of
monopoly, and consequently to stunt the natural growth of some

sovereigns, their interest is exactly the same with that of the country which they govern. As merchants, their interest is directly op-

parts, at least, of the surplus produce of the country, to what is
barely sufficient for answering the demand of the company,

posite to that interest.
But if the genius of such a government, even as to what con-

All the members of the administration besides, trade more or
less upon their own account; and it is in vain to prohibit them

cerns its direction in Europe, is in this manner essentially, and

from doing so. Nothing can be more completely foolish than to

519

The Wealth of Nations
expect that the clerk of a great counting-house, at ten thousand
miles distance, and consequently almost quite out of sight, should,

the country. They will employ the whole authority of government,
and pervert the administration of Justice, in order to harass and

upon a simple order from their master, give up at once doing any
sort of business upon their own account abandon for ever all hopes

ruin those who interfere with them in any branch of commerce,
which by means of agents, either concealed, or at least not pub-

of making a fortune, of which they have the means in their hands;
and content themselves with the moderate salaries which those

licly avowed, they may choose to carry on. But the private trade of
the servants will naturally extend to a much greater variety of ar-

masters allow them, and which, moderate as they are, can seldom
be augmented, being commonly as large as the real profits of the

ticles than the public trade of the company. The public trade of
the company extends no further than the trade with Europe, and

company trade can afford. In such circumstances, to prohibit the
servants of the company from trading upon their own account,

comprehends a part only of the foreign trade of the country. But
the private trade of the servants may extend to all the different

can have scarce any other effect than to enable its superior servants, under pretence of executing their master’s order, to oppress

branches both of its inland and foreign trade. The monopoly of
the company can tend only to stunt the natural growth of that

such of the inferior ones as have had the misfortune to fall under
their displeasure. The servants naturally endeavour to establish

part of the surplus produce which, in the case of a free trade,
would be exported to Europe. That of the servants tends to stunt

the same monopoly in favour of their own private trade as of the
public trade of the company. If they are suffered to act as they

the natural growth of every part of the produce in which they
choose to deal; of what is destined for home consumption, as well

could wish, they will establish this monopoly openly and directly,
by fairly prohibiting all other people from trading in the articles

as of what is destined for exportation; and consequently to degrade the cultivation of the whole country, and to reduce the num-

in which they choose to deal; and this, perhaps, is the best and
least oppressive way of establishing it. But if, by an order from

ber of its inhabitants. It tends to reduce the quantity of every sort
of produce, even that of the necessaries of life, whenever the ser-

Europe, they are prohibited from doing this, they will, notwithstanding, endeavour to establish a monopoly of the same kind

vants of the country choose to deal in them, to what those servants can both afford to buy and expect to sell with such a profit

secretly and indirectly, in a way that is much more destructive to

as pleases them.

520

Adam Smith
From the nature of their situation, too, the servants must be
more disposed to support with rigourous severity their own inter-

fortune with him, it is perfectly indifferent though the whole country was swallowed up by an earthquake.

est, against that of the country which they govern, than their masters can be to support theirs. The country belongs to their mas-

I mean not, however, by any thing which I have here said, to
throw any odious imputation upon the general character of the

ters, who cannot avoid having some regard for the interest of what
belongs to them; but it does not belong to the servants. The real

servants of the East India company, and touch less upon that of
any particular persons. It is the system of government, the situa-

interest of their masters, if they were capable of understanding it,
is the same with that of the country; {The interest of every propri-

tion in which they are placed, that I mean to censure, not the
character of those who have acted in it. They acted as their situa-

etor of India stock, however, is by no means the same with that of
the country in the government of which his vote gives him some

tion naturally directed, and they who have clamoured the loudest
against them would probably not have acted better themselves. In

influence. —See book v, chap. 1, part ii.}and it is from ignorance
chiefly, and the meanness of mercantile prejudice, that they ever

war and negotiation, the councils of Madras and Calcutta, have
upon several occasions, conducted themselves with a resolution

oppress it. But the real interest of the servants is by no means the
same with that of the country, and the most perfect information

and decisive wisdom, which would have done honour to the senate of Rome in the best days of that republic. The members of

would not necessarily put an end to their oppressions. The regulations, accordingly, which have been sent out from Europe, though

those councils, however, had been bred to professions very different from war and politics. But their situation alone, without edu-

they have been frequently weak, have upon most occasions been
well meaning. More intelligence, and perhaps less good meaning,

cation, experience, or even example, seems to have formed in them
all at once the great qualities which it required, and to have in-

has sometimes appeared in those established by the servants in
India. It is a very singular government in which every member of

spired them both with abilities and virtues which they themselves
could not well know that they possessed. If upon some occasions,

the administration wishes to get out of the country, and consequently to have done with the government, as soon as he can, and

therefore, it has animated them to actions of magnanimity which
could not well have been expected from them, we should not

to whose interest, the day after he has left it, and carried his whole

wonder if, upon others, it has prompted them to exploits of some-

521

The Wealth of Nations
what a different nature.
Such exclusive companies, therefore, are nuisances in every re-

CHAPTER VIII

spect; always more or less inconvenient to the countries in which
they are established, and destructive to those which have the mis-

CONCLUSION OF THE MERCANTILE
SYSTEM

fortune to fall under their government.
THOUGH THE ENCOURAGEMENT of exportation, and the discouragement of importation, are the two great engines by which the
mercantile system proposes to enrich every country, yet, with regard to some particular commodities, it seems to follow an opposite plan: to discourage exportation, and to encourage importation. Its ultimate object, however, it pretends, is always the same,
to enrich the country by an advantageous balance of trade. It discourages the exportation of the materials of manufacture, and of
the instruments of trade, in order to give our own workmen an
advantage, and to enable them to undersell those of other nations
in all foreign markets; and by restraining, in this manner, the exportation of a few commodities, of no great price, it proposes to
occasion a much greater and more valuable exportation of others.
It encourages the importation of the materials of manufacture, in
order that our own people may be enabled to work them up more
cheaply, and thereby prevent a greater and more valuable importation of the manufactured commodities. I do not observe, at least
in our statute book, any encouragement given to the importation

522

Adam Smith
of the instruments of trade. When manufactures have advanced
to a certain pitch of greatness, the fabrication of the instruments

facturers may, perhaps, have extorted from the legislature these
exemptions, as well as the greater part of our other commercial

of trade becomes itself the object of a great number of very important manufactures. To give any particular encouragement to the

regulations. They are, however, perfectly just and reasonable; and
if, consistently with the necessities of the state, they could be ex-

importation of such instruments, would interfere too much with
the interest of those manufactures. Such importation, therefore,

tended to all the other materials of manufacture, the public would
certainly be a gainer.

instead of being encouraged, has frequently been prohibited. Thus
the importation of wool cards, except from Ireland, or when

The avidity of our great manufacturers, however, has in some
cases extended these exemptions a good deal beyond what can

brought in as wreck or prize goods, was prohibited by the 3rd of
Edward IV.; which prohibition was renewed by the 39th of Eliza-

justly be considered as the rude materials of their work. By the
24th Geo. II. chap. 46, a small duty of only 1d. the pound was

beth, and has been continued and rendered perpetual by subsequent laws.

imposed upon the importation of foreign brown linen yarn, instead of much higher duties, to which it had been subjected be-

The importation of the materials of manufacture has sometimes
been encouraged by an exemption from the duties to which other

fore, viz. of 6d. the pound upon sail yarn, of 1s. the pound upon
all French and Dutch yarn, and of £2:13:4 upon the hundred

goods are subject, and sometimes by bounties.
The importation of sheep’s wool from several different coun-

weight of all spruce or Muscovia yarn. But our manufacturers were
not long satisfied with this reduction: by the 29th of the same

tries, of cotton wool from all countries, of undressed flax, of the
greater part of dyeing drugs, of the greater part of undressed hides

king, chap. 15, the same law which gave a bounty upon the exportation of British and Irish linen, of which the price did not exceed

from Ireland, or the British colonies, of seal skins from the British
Greenland fishery, of pig and bar iron from the British colonies, as

18d. the yard, even this small duty upon the importation of brown
linen yarn was taken away. In the different operations, however,

well as of several other materials of manufacture, has been encouraged by an exemption from all duties, if properly entered at the

which are necessary for the preparation of linen yarn, a good deal
more industry is employed, than in the subsequent operation of

custom-house. The private interest of our merchants and manu-

preparing linen cloth from linen yarn. To say nothing of the in-

523

The Wealth of Nations
dustry of the flax-growers and flaxdressers, three or four spinners
at least are necessary in order to keep one weaver in constant em-

that is principally encouraged by our mercantile system. That which
is carried on for the benefit of the poor and the indigent is too

ployment; and more than four-fifths of the whole quantity of labour
necessary for the preparation of linen cloth, is employed in that of

often either neglected or oppressed.
Both the bounty upon the exportation of linen, and the exemp-

linen yarn; but our spinners are poor people; women commonly
scattered about in all different parts of the country, without sup-

tion from the duty upon the importation of foreign yarn, which
were granted only for fifteen years, but continued by two different

port or protection. It is not by the sale of their work, but by that
of the complete work of the weavers, that our great master manu-

prolongations, expire with the end of the session of parliament
which shall immediately follow the 24th of June 1786.

facturers make their profits. As it is their interest to sell the complete manufacture as dear, so it is to buy the materials as cheap as

The encouragement given to the importation of the materials
of manufacture by bounties, has been principally confined to such

possible. By extorting from the legislature bounties upon the exportation of their own linen, high duties upon the importation of

as were imported from our American plantations.
The first bounties of this kind were those granted about the

all foreign linen, and a total prohibition of the home consumption of some sorts of French linen, they endeavour to sell their

beginning of the present century, upon the importation of naval
stores from America. Under this denomination were comprehended

own goods as dear as possible. By encouraging the importation of
foreign linen yarn, and thereby bringing it into competition with

timber fit for masts, yards, and bowsprits; hemp, tar, pitch, and
turpentine. The bounty, however, of £1 the ton upon masting-

that which is made by our own people, they endeavour to buy the
work of the poor spinners as cheap as possible. They are as intent

timber, and that of £6 the ton upon hemp, were extended to such
as should be imported into England from Scotland. Both these

to keep down the wages of their own weavers, as the earnings of
the poor spinners; and it is by no means for the benefit of the

bounties continued, without any variation, at the same rate, till
they were severally allowed to expire; that upon hemp on the 1st

workmen that they endeavour either to raise the price of the complete work, or to lower that of the rude materials. It is the industry

of January 1741, and that upon masting-timber at the end of the
session of parliament immediately following the 24th June 1781.

which is carried on for the benefit of the rich and the powerful,

The bounties upon the importation of tar, pitch, and turpentine,

524

Adam Smith
underwent, during their continuance, several alterations. Originally,
that upon tar was £4 the ton; that upon pitch the same; and that

seven years, it was to be at the rate of £8 the ton; for the second at
£6; and for the third at £4. It was not extended to Scotland, of

upon turpentine £3 the ton. The bounty of £4 the ton upon tar was
afterwards confined to such as had been prepared in a particular

which the climate (although hemp is sometimes raised there in
small quantities, and of an inferior quality) is not very fit for that

manner; that upon other good, clean, and merchantable tar was
reduced to £2:4s. the ton. The bounty upon pitch was likewise re-

produce. Such a bounty upon the importation of Scotch flax in
England would have been too great a discouragement to the na-

duced to £1, and that upon turpentine to £1:10s. the ton.
The second bounty upon the importation of any of the materi-

tive produce of the southern part of the united kingdom.
The fourth bounty of this kind was that granted by the 5th

als of manufacture, according to the order of time, was that granted
by the 21st Geo. II. chap.30, upon the importation of indigo from

Geo. III. chap. 45, upon the importation of wood from America.
It was granted for nine years from the 1st January 1766 to the 1st

the British plantations. When the plantation indigo was worth
three-fourths of the price of the best French indigo, it was, by this

January 1775. During the first three years, it was to be for every
hundred-and-twenty good deals, at the rate of £1, and for every

act, entitled to a bounty of 6d. the pound. This bounty, which,
like most others, was granted only for a limited time, was contin-

load containing fifty cubic feet of other square timber, at the rate
of 12s. For the second three years, it was for deals, to be at the rate

ued by several prolongations, but was reduced to 4d. the pound.
It was allowed to expire with the end of the session of parliament

of 15s., and for other squared timber at the rate of 8s.; and for the
third three years, it was for deals, to be at the rate of 10s.; and for

which followed the 25th March 1781.
The third bounty of this kind was that granted (much about the

every other squared timber at the rate of 5s.
The fifth bounty of this kind was that granted by the 9th Geo.

time that we were beginning sometimes to court, and sometimes
to quarrel with our American colonies), by the 4th. Geo. III. chap.

III. chap. 38, upon the importation of raw silk from the British
plantations. It was granted for twenty-one years, from the 1st Janu-

26, upon the importation of hemp, or undressed flax, from the
British plantations. This bounty was granted for twenty-one years,

ary 1770, to the 1st January 1791. For the first seven years, it was
to be at the rate of £25 for every hundred pounds value; for the

from the 24th June 1764 to the 24th June 1785. For the first

second, at £20; and for the third, at £15. The management of the

525

The Wealth of Nations
silk-worm, and the preparation of silk, requires so much handlabour, and labour is so very dear in America, that even this great

other, than the British and American had been before. But this
boon to Ireland, it is to be hoped, has been granted under more

bounty, I have been informed, was not likely to produce any considerable effect.

fortunate auspices than all those to America. The same commodities, upon which we thus gave bounties, when imported from

The sixth Bounty of this kind was that granted by 11th Geo.
III. chap. 50, for the importation of pipe, hogshead, and

America, were subjected to considerable duties when imported
from any other country. The interest of our American colonies

barrelstaves and leading from the British plantations. It was granted
for nine years, from 1st January 1772 to the 1st January 1781. For

was regarded as the same with that of the mother country. Their
wealth was considered as our wealth. Whatever money was sent

the first three years, it was, for a certain quantity of each, to be at
the rate of £6; for the second three years at £4; and for the third

out to them, it was said, came all back to us by the balance of
trade, and we could never become a farthing the poorer by any

three years at £2.
The seventh and last bounty of this kind was that granted by

expense which we could lay out upon them. They were our own
in every respect, and it was an expense laid out upon the improve-

the 19th Geo. III chap. 37, upon the importation of hemp from
Ireland. It was granted in the same manner as that for the impor-

ment of our own property, and for the profitable employment of
our own people. It is unnecessary, I apprehend, at present to say

tation of hemp and undressed flax from America, for twenty-one
years, from the 24th June 1779 to the 24th June 1800. The term

anything further, in order to expose the folly of a system which
fatal experience has now sufficiently exposed. Had our American

is divided likewise into three periods, of seven years each; and in
each of those periods, the rate of the Irish bounty is the same with

colonies really been a part of Great Britain, those bounties might
have been considered as bounties upon production, and would

that of the American. It does not, however, like the American
bounty, extend to the importation of undressed flax. It would have

still have been liable to all the objections to which such bounties
are liable, but to no other.

been too great a discouragement to the cultivation of that plant in
Great Britain. When this last bounty was granted, the British and

The exportation of the materials of manufacture is sometimes
discouraged by absolute prohibitions, and sometimes by high du-

Irish legislatures were not in much better humour with one an-

ties.

526

Adam Smith
Our woollen manufacturers have been more successful than any
other class of workmen, in persuading the legislature that the pros-

accordingly. To prevent the breed of our sheep from being propagated in foreign countries, seems to have been the object of this

perity of the nation depended upon the success and extension of
their particular business. They have not only obtained a monopoly

law. By the 13th and 14th of Charles II. chap. 18, the exportation
of wool was made felony, and the exporter subjected to the same

against the consumers, by an absolute prohibition of importing
woollen cloths from any foreign country; but they have likewise

penalties and forfeitures as a felon.
For the honour of the national humanity, it is to be hoped that

obtained another monopoly against the sheep farmers and growers of wool, by a similar prohibition of the exportation of live

neither of these statutes was ever executed. The first of them, however, so far as I know, has never been directly repealed, and ser-

sheep and wool. The severity of many of the laws which have been
enacted for the security of the revenue is very justly complained

jeant Hawkins seems to consider it as still in force. It may, however, perhaps be considered as virtually repealed by the 12th of

of, as imposing heavy penalties upon actions which, antecedent to
the statutes that declared them to be crimes, had always been un-

Charles II. chap. 32, sect. 3, which, without expressly taking away
the penalties imposed by former statutes, imposes a new penalty,

derstood to be innocent. But the cruellest of our revenue laws, I
will venture to affirm, are mild and gentle, in comparison to some

viz. that of 20s. for every sheep exported, or attempted to be exported, together with the forfeiture of the sheep, and of the owner’s

of those which the clamour of our merchants and manufacturers
has extorted from the legislature, for the support of their own

share of the sheep. The second of them was expressly repealed by
the 7th and 8th of William III. chap. 28, sect. 4, by which it is

absurd and oppressive monopolies. Like the laws of Draco, these
laws may be said to be all written in blood.

declared that “Whereas the statute of the 13th and 14th of king
Charles II. made against the exportation of wool, among other

By the 8th of Elizabeth, chap. 3, the exporter of sheep, lambs,
or rams, was for the first offence, to forfeit all his goods for ever, to

things in the said act mentioned, doth enact the same to be deemed
felony, by the severity of which penalty the prosecution of offend-

suffer a year’s imprisonment, and then to have his left hand cut off
in a market town, upon a market day, to be there nailed up; and

ers hath not been so effectually put in execution; be it therefore
enacted, by the authority aforesaid, that so much of the said act,

for the second offence, to be adjudged a felon, and to suffer death

which relates to the making the said offence felony, be repealed

527

The Wealth of Nations
and made void.”
The penalties, however, which are either imposed by this milder

In order to prevent exportation, the whole inland commerce of
wool is laid under very burdensome and oppressive restrictions. It

statute, or which, though imposed by former statutes, are not repealed by this one, are still sufficiently severe. Besides the forfei-

cannot be packed in any box, barrel, cask, case, chest, or any other
package, but only in packs of leather or pack-cloth, on which must

ture of the goods, the exporter incurs the penalty of 3s. for every
pound weight of wool, either exported or attempted to be ex-

be marked on the outside the words WOOL or YARN, in large
letters, not less than three inches long, on pain of forfeiting the

ported, that is, about four or five times the value. Any merchant,
or other person convicted of this offence, is disabled from requir-

same and the package, and 8s. for every pound weight, to be paid
by the owner or packer. It cannot be loaden on any horse or cart,

ing any debt or account belonging to him from any factor or other
person. Let his fortune be what it will, whether he is or is not able

or carried by land within five miles of the coast, but between sunrising, and sun-setting, on pain of forfeiting the same, the horses

to pay those heavy penalties, the law means to ruin him completely. But, as the morals of the great body of the people are not

and carriages. The hundred next adjoining to the sea coast, out of,
or through which the wool is carried or exported, forfeits £20, if

yet so corrupt as those of the contrivers of this statute, I have not
heard that any advantage has ever been taken of this clause. If the

the wool is under the value of £10; and if of greater value, then
treble that value, together with treble costs, to be sued for within

person convicted of this offence is not able to pay the penalties
within three months after judgment, he is to be transported for

the year. The execution to be against any two of the inhabitants,
whom the sessions must reimburse, by an assessment on the other

seven years; and if he returns before the expiration of that term, he
is liable to the pains of felony, without benefit of clergy. The owner

inhabitants, as in the cases of robbery. And if any person compounds with the hundred for less than this penalty, he is to be

of the ship, knowing this offence, forfeits all his interest in the
ship and furniture. The master and mariners, knowing this of-

imprisoned for five years; and any other person may prosecute.
These regulations take place through the whole kingdom.

fence, forfeit all their goods and chattels, and suffer three months
imprisonment. By a subsequent statute, the master suffers six

But in the particular counties of Kent and Sussex, the restrictions are still more troublesome. Every owner of wool within ten

months imprisonment.

miles of the sea coast must give an account in writing, three days

528

Adam Smith
after shearing, to the next officer of the customs, of the number of
his fleeces, and of the places where they are lodged. And before he

intended to be conveyed, containing the weight, marks, and number, of the packages, before he brings the same within five miles of

removes any part of them, he must give the like notice of the
number and weight of the fleeces, and of the name and abode of

that port, on pain of forfeiting the same, and also the horses, carts,
and other carriages; and also of suffering and forfeiting, as by the

the person to whom they are sold, and of the place to which it is
intended they should be carried. No person within fifteen miles of

other laws in force against the exportation of wool. This law, however (1st of William III. chap. 32), is so very indulgent as to de-

the sea, in the said counties, can buy any wool, before he enters
into bond to the king, that no part of the wool which he shall so

clare, that this shall not hinder any person from carrying his wool
home from the place of shearing, though it be within five miles of

buy shall be sold by him to any other person within fifteen miles
of the sea. If any wool is found carrying towards the sea side in the

the sea, provided that in ten days after shearing, and before he
remove the wool, he do under his hand certify to the next officer

said counties, unless it has been entered and security given as aforesaid, it is forfeited, and the offender also forfeits 3s. for every pound

of the customs the true number of fleeces, and where it is housed;
and do not remove the same, without certifying to such officer,

weight, if any person lay any wool, not entered as aforesaid, within
fifteen miles of the sea, it must be seized and forfeited; and if, after

under his hand, his intention so to do, three days before. Bond
must be given that the wool to be carried coast-ways is to be landed

such seizure, any person shall claim the same, he must give security to the exchequer, that if he is cast upon trial he shall pay treble

at the particular port for which it is entered outwards; and if my
part of it is landed without the presence of an officer, not only the

costs, besides all other penalties.
When such restrictions are imposed upon the inland trade, the

forfeiture of the wool is incurred, as in other goods, but the usual
additional penalty of 3s. for every pound weight is likewise in-

coasting trade, we may believe, cannot be left very free. Every owner
of wool, who carrieth, or causeth to be carried, any wool to any

curred.
Our woollen manufacturers, in order to justify their demand of

port or place on the sea coast, in order to be from thence transported by sea to any other place or port on the coast, must first

such extraordinary restrictions and regulations, confidently asserted, that English wool was of a peculiar quality, superior to that

cause an entry thereof to be made at the port from whence it is

of any other country; that the wool of other countries could not,

529

The Wealth of Nations
without some mixture of it, be wrought up into any tolerable manufacture; that fine cloth could not be made without it; that En-

fallen about one half. It is observed by the very accurate and intelligent author of the Memoirs of Wool, the Reverend Mr. John Smith,

gland, therefore, if the exportation of it could be totally prevented,
could monopolize to herself almost the whole woollen trade of

that the price of the best English wool in England, is generally below what wool of a very inferior quality commonly sells for in the

the world; and thus, having no rivals, could sell at what price she
pleased, and in a short time acquire the most incredible degree of

market of Amsterdam. To depress the price of this commodity below what may be called its natural and proper price, was the avowed

wealth by the most advantageous balance of trade. This doctrine,
like most other doctrines which are confidently asserted by any

purpose of those regulations; and there seems to be no doubt of
their having produced the effect that was expected from them.

considerable number of people, was, and still continues to be,
most implicitly believed by a much greater number: by almost all

This reduction of price, it may perhaps be thought, by discouraging the growing of wool, must have reduced very much the an-

those who are either unacquainted with the woollen trade, or who
have not made particular inquiries. It is, however, so perfectly false,

nual produce of that commodity, though not below what it formerly was, yet below what, in the present state of things, it would

that English wool is in any respect necessary for the making of
fine cloth, that it is altogether unfit for it. Fine cloth is made alto-

probably have been, had it, in consequence of an open and free
market, been allowed to rise to the natural and proper price. I am,

gether of Spanish wool. English wool, cannot be even so mixed
with Spanish wool, as to enter into the composition without spoil-

however, disposed to believe, that the quantity of the annual produce cannot have been much, though it may, perhaps, have been

ing and degrading, in some degree, the fabric of the cloth.
It has been shown in the foregoing part of this work, that the

a little affected by these regulations. The growing of wool is not
the chief purpose for which the sheep farmer employs his industry

effect of these regulations has been to depress the price of English
wool, not only below what it naturally would be in the present

and stock. He expects his profit, not so much from the price of
the fleece, as from that of the carcase; and the average or ordinary

times, but very much below what it actually was in the time of
Edward III. The price of Scotch wool, when, in consequence of the

price of the latter must even, in many cases, make up to him whatever deficiency there may be in the average or ordinary price of

Union, it became subject to the same regulations, is said to have

the former. It has been observed, in the foregoing part of this

530

Adam Smith
work, that ‘whatever regulations tend to sink the price, either of
wool or of raw hides, below what it naturally would be, must, in

But though its effect upon the quantity of the annual produce
may not have been very considerable, its effect upon the quality, it

an improved and cultivated country, have some tendency to raise
the price of butcher’s meat. The price, both of the great and small

may perhaps be thought, must necessarily have been very great. The
degradation in the quality of English wool, if not below what it was

cattle which are fed on improved and cultivated land, must be
sufficient to pay the rent which the landlord, and the profit which

in former times, yet below what it naturally would have been in the
present state of improvement and cultivation, must have been, it

the farmer, has reason to expect from improved and cultivated
land. If it is not, they will soon cease to feed them. Whatever part

may perhaps be supposed, very nearly in proportion to the degradation of price. As the quality depends upon the breed, upon the

of this price, therefore, is not paid by the wool and the hide, must
be paid by the carcase. The less there is paid for the one, the more

pasture, and upon the management and cleanliness of the sheep,
during the whole progress of the growth of the fleece, the attention

must be paid for the other. In what manner this price is to be divided upon the different parts of the beast, is indifferent to the land-

to these circumstances, it may naturally enough be imagined, can
never be greater than in proportion to the recompence which the

lords and farmers, provided it is all paid to them. In an improved
and cultivated country, therefore, their interest as landlords and farm-

price of the fleece is likely to make for the labour and expense which
that attention requires. It happens, however, that the goodness of

ers cannot be much affected by such regulations, though their interest as consumers may, by the rise in the price of provisions.’ Accord-

the fleece depends, in a great measure, upon the health, growth, and
bulk of the animal: the same attention which is necessary for the

ing to this reasoning, therefore, this degradation in the price of wool
is not likely, in an improved and cultivated country, to occasion any

improvement of the carcase is, in some respect, sufficient for that of
the fleece. Notwithstanding the degradation of price, English wool

diminution in the annual produce of that commodity; except so far
as, by raising the price of mutton, it may somewhat diminish the

is said to have been improved considerably during the course even
of the present century. The improvement, might, perhaps, have been

demand for, and consequently the production of, that particular
species of butcher’s meat, Its effect, however, even in this way, it is

greater if the price had been better; but the lowness of price, though
it may have obstructed, yet certainly it has not altogether prevented

probable, is not very considerable.

that improvement.

531

The Wealth of Nations
The violence of these regulations, therefore, seems to have affected neither the quantity nor the quality of the annual produce of

so much. It would afford a sufficient advantage to the manufacturer, because, though he might not buy his wool altogether so

wool, so much as it might have been expected to do (though I think
it probable that it may have affected the latter a good deal more

cheap as under the prohibition, he would still buy it at least five or
ten shillings cheaper than any foreign manufacturer could buy it,

than the former); and the interest of the growers of wool, though it
must have been hurt in some degree, seems upon the whole, to have

besides saving the freight and insurance which the other would be
obliged to pay. It is scarce possible to devise a tax which could

been much less hurt than could well have been imagined.
These considerations, however, will not justify the absolute pro-

produce any considerable revenue to the sovereign, and at the same
time occasion so little inconveniency to anybody.

hibition of the exportation of wool; but they will fully justify the
imposition of a considerable tax upon that exportation.

The prohibition, notwithstanding all the penalties which guard

To hurt, in any degree, the interest of any one order of citizens,
for no other purpose but to promote that of some other, is evi-

it, does not prevent the exportation of wool. It is exported, it is
well known, in great quantities. The great difference between the

dently contrary to that justice and equality of treatment which the
sovereign owes to all the different orders of his subjects. But the

price in the home and that in the foreign market, presents such a
temptation to smuggling, that all the rigour of the law cannot

prohibition certainly hurts, in some degree, the interest of the
growers of wool, for no other purpose but to promote that of the

prevent it. This illegal exportation is advantageous to nobody but
the smuggler. A legal exportation, subject to a tax, by affording a

manufacturers.
Every different order of citizens is bound to contribute to the

revenue to the sovereign, and thereby saving the imposition of
some other, perhaps more burdensome and inconvenient taxes,

support of the sovereign or commonwealth. A tax of five, or even
of ten shillings, upon the exportation of every tod of wool, would

might prove advantageous to all the different subjects of the state.
The exportation of fuller’s earth, or fuller’s clay, supposed to be

produce a very considerable revenue to the sovereign. It would
hurt the interest of the growers somewhat less than the prohibi-

necessary for preparing and cleansing the woollen manufactures,
has been subjected to nearly the same penalties as the exportation

tion, because it would not probably lower the price of wool quite

of wool. Even tobacco-pipe clay, though acknowledged to be dif-

532

Adam Smith
ferent from fuller’s clay, yet, on account of their resemblance, and
because fuller’s clay might sometimes be exported as tobacco-pipe

horns of cattle are prohibited to be exported; and the two insignificant trades of the horner and comb-maker enjoy, in this re-

clay, has been laid under the same prohibitions and penalties.
By the 13th and 14th of Charles II. chap, 7, the exportation,

spect, a monopoly against the graziers.
Restraints, either by prohibitions, or by taxes, upon the expor-

not only of raw hides, but of tanned leather, except in the shape of
boots, shoes, or slippers, was prohibited; and the law gave a mo-

tation of goods which are partially, but not completely manufactured, are not peculiar to the manufacture of leather. As long as

nopoly to our boot-makers and shoe-makers, not only against our
graziers, but against our tanners. By subsequent statutes, our tan-

anything remains to be done, in order to fit any commodity for
immediate use and consumption, our manufacturers think that

ners have got themselves exempted from this monopoly, upon
paying a small tax of only one shilling on the hundred weight of

they themselves ought to have the doing of it. Woollen yarn and
worsted are prohibited to be exported, under the same penalties as

tanned leather, weighing one hundred and twelve pounds. They
have obtained likewise the drawback of two-thirds of the excise

wool even white cloths we subject to a duty upon exportation;
and our dyers have so far obtained a monopoly against our cloth-

duties imposed upon their commodity, even when exported without further manufacture. All manufactures of leather may be ex-

iers. Our clothiers would probably have been able to defend themselves against it; but it happens that the greater part of our princi-

ported duty free; and the exporter is besides entitled to the drawback of the whole duties of excise. Our graziers still continue sub-

pal clothiers are themselves likewise dyers. Watch-cases, clock-cases,
and dial-plates for clocks and watches, have been prohibited to be

ject to the old monopoly. Graziers, separated from one another,
and dispersed through all the different corners of the country, can-

exported. Our clock-makers and watch-makers are, it seems, unwilling that the price of this sort of workmanship should be raised

not, without great difficulty, combine together for the purpose
either of imposing monopolies upon their fellow-citizens, or of

upon them by the competition of foreigners.
By some old statutes of Edward III, Henry VIII. and Edward

exempting themselves from such as may have been imposed upon
them by other people. Manufacturers of all kinds, collected to-

VI. the exportation of all metals was prohibited. Lead and tin
were alone excepted, probably on account of the great abundance

gether in numerous bodies in all great cities, easily can. Even the

of those metals; in the exportation of which a considerable part of

533

The Wealth of Nations
the trade of the kingdom in those days consisted. For the encouragement of the mining trade, the 5th of William and Mary,

upon them, the old subsidy, and one per cent. outwards.
By the same statute, a great number of foreign drugs for dyers

chap.17, exempted from this prohibition iron, copper, and mundic
metal made from British ore. The exportation of all sorts of cop-

use are exempted from all duties upon importation. Each of them,
however, is afterwards subjected to a certain duty, not indeed a

per bars, foreign as well as British, was afterwards permitted by
the 9th and 10th of William III. chap 26. The exportation of

very heavy one, upon exportation. Our dyers, it seems, while they
thought it for their interest to encourage the importation of those

unmanufactured brass, of what is called gun-metal, bell-metal,
and shroff metal, still continues to be prohibited. Brass manufac-

drugs, by an exemption from all duties, thought it likewise for
their own interest to throw some small discouragement upon their

tures of all sorts may be exported duty free.
The exportation of the materials of manufacture, where it is not

exportation. The avidity, however, which suggested this notable
piece of mercantile ingenuity, most probably disappointed itself

altogether prohibited, is, in many cases, subjected to considerable
duties.

of its object. It necessarily taught the importers to be more careful
than they might otherwise have been, that their importation should

By the 8th Geo. I. chap.15, the exportation of all goods, the
produce of manufacture of Great Britain, upon which any duties

not exceed what was necessary for the supply of the home market.
The home market was at all times likely to be more scantily sup-

had been imposed by former statutes, was rendered duty free. The
following goods, however, were excepted: alum, lead, lead-ore, tin,

plied; the commodities were at all times likely to be somewhat
dearer there than they would have been, had the exportation been

tanned leather, copperas, coals, wool, cards, white woollen cloths,
lapis calaminaris, skins of all sorts, glue, coney hair or wool, hares

rendered as free as the importation.
By the above-mentioned statute, gum senega, or gum arabic,

wool, hair of all sorts, horses, and litharge of lead. If you except
horses, all these are either materials of manufacture, or incom-

being among the enumerated dyeing drugs, might be imported
duty free. They were subjected, indeed, to a small poundage duty,

plete manufactures (which may be considered as materials for still
further manufacture), or instruments of trade. This statute leaves

amounting only to threepence in the hundred weight, upon their
re-exportation. France enjoyed, at that time, an exclusive trade to

them subject to all the old duties which had ever been imposed

the country most productive of those drugs, that which lies in the

534

Adam Smith
neighbourhood of the Senegal; and the British market could not
be easily supplied by the immediate importation of them from the

tion of our manufacturers, that the whole produce of those countries should be imported into Great Britain; and in order that they

place of growth. By the 25th Geo. II. therefore, gum senega was
allowed to be imported (contrary to the general dispositions of

themselves might be enabled to buy it at their own price, that no
part of it should be exported again, but at such an expense as

the act of navigation) from any part of Europe. As the law, however, did not mean to encourage this species of trade, so contrary

would sufficiently discourage that exportation. Their avidity, however, upon this, as well as upon many other occasions, disappointed

to the general principles of the mercantile policy of England, it
imposed a duty of ten shillings the hundred weight upon such

itself of its object. This enormous duty presented such a temptation to smuggling, that great quantities of this commodity were

importation, and no part of this duty was to be afterwards drawn
back upon its exportation. The successful war which began in 1755

clandestinely exported, probably to all the manufacturing countries of Europe, but particularly to Holland, not only from Great

gave Great Britain the same exclusive trade to those countries which
France had enjoyed before. Our manufactures, as soon as the peace

Britain, but from Africa. Upon this account, by the 14th Geo. III.
chap.10, this duty upon exportation was reduced to five shillings

was made, endeavoured to avail themselves of this advantage, and
to establish a monopoly in their own favour both against the grow-

the hundred weight.
In the book of rates, according to which the old subsidy was

ers and against the importers of this commodity. By the 5th of
Geo. III. therefore, chap. 37, the exportation of gum senega, from

levied, beaver skins were estimated at six shillings and eight pence
a piece; and the different subsidies and imposts which, before the

his majesty’s dominions in Africa, was confined to Great Britain,
and was subjected to all the same restrictions, regulations, forfei-

year 1722, had been laid upon their importation, amounted to
one-fifth part of the rate, or to sixteen pence upon each skin; all of

tures, and penalties, as that of the enumerated commodities of the
British colonies in America and the West Indies. Its importation,

which, except half the old subsidy, amounting only to twopence,
was drawn back upon exportation. This duty, upon the importa-

indeed, was subjected to a small duty of sixpence the hundred
weight; but its re-exportation was subjected to the enormous duty

tion of so important a material of manufacture, had been thought
too high; and, in the year 1722, the rate was reduced to two shil-

of one pound ten shillings the hundred weight. It was the inten-

lings and sixpence, which reduced the duty upon importation to

535

The Wealth of Nations
sixpence, and of this only one-half was to be drawn back upon
exportation. The same successful war put the country most pro-

The exportation, however, of the instruments of trade, properly
so called, is commonly restrained, not by high duties, but by ab-

ductive of beaver under the dominion of Great Britain; and beaver skins being among the enumerated commodities, the exporta-

solute prohibitions. Thus, by the 7th and 8th of William III
chap.20, sect.8, the exportation of frames or engines for knitting

tion from America was consequently confined to the market of
Great Britain. Our manufacturers soon bethought themselves of

gloves or stockings, is prohibited, under the penalty, not only of
the forfeiture of such frames or engines, so exported, or attempted

the advantage which they might make of this circumstance; and
in the year 1764, the duty upon the importation of beaver skin

to be exported, but of forty pounds, one half to the king, the
other to the person who shall inform or sue for the same. In the

was reduced to one penny, but the duty upon exportation was
raised to sevenpence each skin, without any drawback of the duty

same manner, by the 14th Geo. III. chap. 71, the exportation to
foreign parts, of any utensils made use of in the cotton, linen,

upon importation. By the same law, a duty of eighteen pence the
pound was imposed upon the exportation of beaver wool or

woollen, and silk manufactures, is prohibited under the penalty,
not only of the forfeiture of such utensils, but of two hundred

woumbs, without making any alteration in the duty upon the
importation of that commodity, which, when imported by Brit-

pounds, to be paid by the person who shall offend in this manner;
and likewise of two hundred pounds, to be paid by the master of

ish, and in British shipping, amounted at that time to between
fourpence and fivepence the piece.

the ship, who shall knowingly suffer such utensils to be loaded on
board his ship.

Coals may be considered both as a material of manufacture,
and as an instrument of trade. Heavy duties, accordingly, have

When such heavy penalties were imposed upon the exportation
of the dead instruments of trade, it could not well be expected

been imposed upon their exportation, amounting at present (1783)
to more than five shillings the ton, or more than fifteen shillings

that the living instrument, the artificer, should be allowed to go
free. Accordingly, by the 5th Geo. I. chap. 27, the person who

the chaldron, Newcastle measure; which is, in most cases, more
than the original value of the commodity at the coal-pit, or even

shall be convicted of enticing any artificer, of or in any of the
manufactures of Great Britain, to go into any foreign parts, in

at the shipping port for exportation.

order to practise or teach his trade, is liable, for the first offence, to

536

Adam Smith
be fined in any sum not exceeding one hundred pounds, and to
three months imprisonment, and until the fine shall be paid; and

ing any legacy devised to him within this kingdom, or of being
executor or administrator to any person, or of taking any lands

for the second offence, to be fined in any sum, at the discretion of
the court, and to imprisonment for twelve months, and until the

within this kingdom, by descent, devise, or purchase. He likewise
forfeits to the king all his lands, goods, and chattels; is declared an

fine shall be paid. By the 23d Geo. II. chap. 13, this penalty is
increased, for the first offence, to five hundred pounds for every

alien in every respect; and is put out of the king’s protection.
It is unnecessary, I imagine, to observe how contrary such regu-

artificer so enticed, and to twelve months imprisonment, and until
the fine shall be paid; and for the second offence, to one thousand

lations are to the boasted liberty of the subject, of which we affect
to be so very jealous; but which, in this case, is so plainly sacrificed

pounds, and to two years imprisonment, and until the fine shall
be paid.

to the futile interests of our merchants and manufacturers.
The laudable motive of all these regulations, is to extend our

By the former of these two statutes, upon proof that any person
has been enticing any artificer, or that any artificer has promised

own manufactures, not by their own improvement, but by the
depression of those of all our neighbours, and by putting an end,

or contracted to go into foreign parts, for the purposes aforesaid,
such artificer may be obliged to give security, at the discretion of

as much as possible, to the troublesome competition of such odious and disagreeable rivals. Our master manufacturers think it

the court, that he shall not go beyond the seas, and may be committed to prison until he give such security.

reasonable that they themselves should have the monopoly of the
ingenuity of all their countrymen. Though by restraining, in some

If any artificer has gone beyond the seas, and is exercising or
teaching his trade in any foreign country, upon warning being

trades, the number of apprentices which can be employed at one
time, and by imposing the necessity of a long apprenticeship in all

given to him by any of his majesty’s ministers or consuls abroad,
or by one of his majesty’s secretaries of state, for the time being, if

trades, they endeavour, all of them, to confine the knowledge of
their respective employments to as small a number as possible;

he does not, within six months after such warning, return into
this realm, and from henceforth abide and inhabit continually

they are unwilling, however, that any part of this small number
should go abroad to instruct foreigners.

within the same, he is from thenceforth declared incapable of tak-

Consumption is the sole end and purpose of all production;

537

The Wealth of Nations
and the interest of the producer ought to be attended to, only so
far as it may be necessary for promoting that of the consumer.

edged, that the commodity of the distant country is of a worse
quality than that of the near one. The home consumer is obliged

The maxim is so perfectly self-evident, that it would be absurd
to attempt to prove it. But in the mercantile system, the interest of

to submit to this inconvenience, in order that the producer may
import into the distant country some of his productions, upon

the consumer is almost constantly sacrificed to that of the producer; and it seems to consider production, and not consump-

more advantageous terms than he otherwise would have been allowed to do. The consumer, too, is obliged to pay whatever en-

tion, as the ultimate end and object of all industry and commerce.
In the restraints upon the importation of all foreign commodi-

hancement in the price of those very productions this forced exportation may occasion in the home market.

ties which can come into competition with those of our own growth
or manufacture, the interest of the home consumer is evidently

But in the system of laws which has been established for the
management of our American and West Indian colonies, the in-

sacrificed to that of the producer. It is altogether for the benefit of
the latter, that the former is obliged to pay that enhancement of

terest of the home consumer has been sacrificed to that of the
producer, with a more extravagant profusion than in all our other

price which this monopoly almost always occasions.
It is altogether for the benefit of the producer, that bounties are

commercial regulations. A great empire has been established for
the sole purpose of raising up a nation of customers, who should

granted upon the exportation of some of his productions. The
home consumer is obliged to pay, first the tax which is necessary

be obliged to buy, from the shops of our different producers, all
the goods with which these could supply them. For the sake of

for paying the bounty; and, secondly, the still greater tax which
necessarily arises from the enhancement of the price of the com-

that little enhancement of price which this monopoly might afford our producers, the home consumers have been burdened with

modity in the home market.
By the famous treaty of commerce with Portugal, the consumer

the whole expense of maintaining and defending that empire. For
this purpose, and for this purpose only, in the two last wars, more

is prevented by duties from purchasing of a neighbouring country, a commodity which our own climate does not produce; but is

than two hundred millions have been spent, and a new debt of
more than a hundred and seventy millions has been contracted,

obliged to purchase it of a distant country, though it is acknowl-

over and above all that had been expended for the same purpose

538

Adam Smith
in former wars. The interest of this debt alone is not only greater
than the whole extraordinary profit which, it never could be pre-

CHAPTER IX

tended, was made by the monopoly of the colony trade, but than
the whole value of that trade, or than the whole value of the goods

OF THE AGRICULTURAL SYSTEMS, OR
OF THOSE SYSTEMS OF POLITICAL
ECONOMY WHICH REPRESENT THE
PRODUCE OF LAND, AS EITHER THE
SOLE OR THE PRINCIPAL SOURCE OF
THE REVENUE AND WEALTH OF EVERY
COUNTRY

which, at an average, have been annually exported to the colonies.
It cannot be very difficult to determine who have been the contrivers of this whole mercantile system; not the consumers, we
may believe, whose interest has been entirely neglected; but the
producers, whose interest has been so carefully attended to; and
among this latter class, our merchants and manufacturers have
been by far the principal architects. In the mercantile regulations
which have been taken notice of in this chapter, the interest of our

THE AGRICULTURAL SYSTEMS of political economy will not require
so long an explanation as that which I have thought it necessary to

manufacturers has been most peculiarly attended to; and the interest, not so much of the consumers, as that of some other sets of

bestow upon the mercantile or commercial system.
That system which represents the produce of land as the sole

producers, has been sacrificed to it.

source of the revenue and wealth of every country, has so far as I
know, never been adopted by any nation, and it at present exists
only in the speculations of a few men of great learning and ingenuity in France. It would not, surely, be worth while to examine at
great length the errors of a system which never has done, and
probably never will do, any harm in any part of the world. I shall
endeavour to explain, however, as distinctly as I can, the great
outlines of this very ingenious system.
Mr. Colbert, the famous minister of Lewis XIV. was a man of

539

The Wealth of Nations
probity, of great industry, and knowledge of detail; of great experience and acuteness in the examination of public accounts; and

thus excluded the inhabitants of the country from every foreign
market, for by far the most important part of the produce of their

of abilities, in short, every way fitted for introducing method and
good order into the collection and expenditure of the public rev-

industry. This prohibition, joined to the restraints imposed by the
ancient provincial laws of France upon the transportation of corn

enue. That minister had unfortunately embraced all the prejudices of the mercantile system, in its nature and essence a system

from one province to another, and to the arbitrary and degrading
taxes which are levied upon the cultivators in almost all the prov-

of restraint and regulation, and such as could scarce fail to be
agreeable to a laborious and plodding man of business, who had

inces, discouraged and kept down the agriculture of that country
very much below the state to which it would naturally have risen

been accustomed to regulate the different departments of public
offices, and to establish the necessary checks and controls for con-

in so very fertile a soil, and so very happy a climate. This state of
discouragement and depression was felt more or less in every dif-

fining each to its proper sphere. The industry and commerce of a
great country, he endeavoured to regulate upon the same model as

ferent part of the country, and many different inquiries were set
on foot concerning the causes of it. One of those causes appeared

the departments of a public office; and instead of allowing every
man to pursue his own interest his own way, upon the liberal plan

to be the preference given, by the institutions of Mr. Colbert, to
the industry of the towns above that of the country.

of equality, liberty, and justice, he bestowed upon certain branches
of industry extraordinary privileges, while he laid others under as

If the rod be bent too much one way, says the proverb, in order
to make it straight, you must bend it as much the other. The French

extraordinary restraints. He was not only disposed, like other European ministers, to encourage more the industry of the towns

philosophers, who have proposed the system which represents
agriculture as the sole source of the revenue and wealth of every

than that of the country; but, in order to support the industry of
the towns, he was willing even to depress and keep down that of

country, seem to have adopted this proverbial maxim; and, as in
the plan of Mr. Colbert, the industry of the towns was certainly

the country. In order to render provisions cheap to the inhabitants
of the towns, and thereby to encourage manufactures and foreign

overvalued in comparison with that of the country, so in their
system it seems to be as certainly under-valued.

commerce, he prohibited altogether the exportation of corn, and

The different orders of people, who have ever been supposed to

540

Adam Smith
contribute in any respect towards the annual produce of the land
and labour of the country, they divide into three classes. The first

and in the maintenance of the farmer’s family, servants, and cattle,
during at least a great part of the first year of his occupancy, or till

is the class of the proprietors of land. The second is the class of the
cultivators, of farmers and country labourers, whom they honour

he can receive some return from the land. The annual expenses
consist in the seed, in the wear and tear of instruments of hus-

with the peculiar appellation of the productive class. The third is
the class of artificers, manufacturers, and merchants, whom they

bandry, and in the annual maintenance of the farmer’s servants
and cattle, and of his family too, so far as any part of them can be

endeavour to degrade by the humiliating appellation of the barren
or unproductive class.

considered as servants employed in cultivation. That part of the
produce of the land which remains to him after paying the rent,

The class of proprietors contributes to the annual produce, by
the expense which they may occasionally lay out upon the im-

ought to be sufficient, first, to replace to him, within a reasonable
time, at least during the term of his occupancy, the whole of his

provement of the land, upon the buildings, drains, inclosures, and
other ameliorations, which they may either make or maintain upon

original expenses, together with the ordinary profits of stock; and,
secondly, to replace to him annually the whole of his annual ex-

it, and by means of which the cultivators are enabled, with the
same capital, to raise a greater produce, and consequently to pay a

penses, together likewise with the ordinary profits of stock. Those
two sorts of expenses are two capitals which the farmer employs in

greater rent. This advanced rent may be considered as the interest
or profit due to the proprietor, upon the expense or capital which

cultivation; and unless they are regularly restored to him, together
with a reasonable profit, he cannot carry on his employment upon

he thus employs in the improvement of his land. Such expenses
are in this system called ground expenses (depenses foncieres).

a level with other employments; but, from a regard to his own
interest, must desert it as soon as possible, and seek some other.

The cultivators or farmers contribute to the annual produce, by
what are in this system called the original and annual expenses

That part of the produce of the land which is thus necessary for
enabling the farmer to continue his business, ought to be consid-

(depenses primitives, et depenses annuelles), which they lay out
upon the cultivation of the land. The original expenses consist in

ered as a fund sacred to cultivation, which, if the landlord violates,
he necessarily reduces the produce of his own land, and, in a few

the instruments of husbandry, in the stock of cattle, in the seed,

years, not only disables the farmer from paying this racked rent,

541

The Wealth of Nations
but from paying the reasonable rent which he might otherwise
have got for his land. The rent which properly belongs to the land-

future increase of his own taxes. As in a well ordered state of things,
therefore, those ground expenses, over and above reproducing in

lord, is no more than the neat produce which remains after paying, in the completest manner, all the necessary expenses which

the completest manner their own value, occasion likewise, after a
certain time, a reproduction of a neat produce, they are in this

must be previously laid out, in order to raise the gross or the whole
produce. It is because the labour of the cultivators, over and above

system considered as productive expenses.
The ground expenses of the landlord, however, together with

paying completely all those necessary expenses, affords a neat produce of this kind, that this class of people are in this system pecu-

the original and the annual expenses of the farmer, are the only
three sorts of expenses which in this system are considered as pro-

liarly distinguished by the honourable appellation of the productive class. Their original and annual expenses are for the same

ductive. All other expenses, and all other orders of people, even
those who, in the common apprehensions of men, are regarded as

reason called, In this system, productive expenses, because, over
and above replacing their own value, they occasion the annual

the most productive, are, in this account of things, represented as
altogether barren and unproductive.

reproduction of this neat produce.
The ground expenses, as they are called, or what the landlord

Artificers and manufacturers, in particular, whose industry, in
the common apprehensions of men, increases so much the value

lays out upon the improvement of his land, are, in this system,
too, honoured with the appellation of productive expenses. Till

of the rude produce of land, are in this system represented as a
class of people altogether barren and unproductive. Their labour,

the whole of those expenses, together with the ordinary profits of
stock, have been completely repaid to him by the advanced rent

it is said, replaces only the stock which employs them, together
with its ordinary profits. That stock consists in the materials, tools,

which he gets from his land, that advanced rent ought to be regarded as sacred and inviolable, both by the church and by the

and wages, advanced to them by their employer; and is the fund
destined for their employment and maintenance. Its profits are

king; ought to be subject neither to tithe nor to taxation. If it is
otherwise, by discouraging the improvement of land, the church

the fund destined for the maintenance of their employer. Their
employer, as he advances to them the stock of materials, tools, and

discourages the future increase of her own tithes, and the king the

wages, necessary for their employment, so he advances to himself

542

Adam Smith
what is necessary for his own maintenance; and this maintenance
he generally proportions to the profit which he expects to make

ment of the maintenance which its employer advances to himself
during the time that he employs it, or till he receives the returns of

by the price of their work. Unless its price repays to him the maintenance which he advances to himself, as well as the materials,

it. They are only the repayment of a part of the expense which
must be laid out in employing it.

tools, and wages, which he advances to his workmen, it evidently
does not repay to him the whole expense which he lays out upon

The labour of artificers and manufacturers never adds any thing
to the value of the whole annual amount of the rude produce of

it. The profits of manufacturing stock, therefore, are not, like the
rent of land, a neat produce which remains after completely re-

the land. It adds, indeed, greatly to the value of some particular
parts of it. But the consumption which, in the mean time, it occa-

paying the whole expense which must be laid out in order to obtain them. The stock of the farmer yields him a profit, as well as

sions of other parts, is precisely equal to the value which it adds to
those parts; so that the value of the whole amount is not, at any

that of the master manufacturer; and it yields a rent likewise to
another person, which that of the master manufacturer does not.

one moment of time, in the least augmented by it. The person
who works the lace of a pair of fine ruffles for example, will some-

The expense, therefore, laid out in employing and maintaining
artificers and manufacturers, does no more than continue, if one

times raise the value of, perhaps, a pennyworth of flax to £30
sterling. But though, at first sight, he appears thereby to multiply

may say so, the existence of its own value, and does not produce
any new value. It is, therefore, altogether a barren and unproduc-

the value of a part of the rude produce about seven thousand and
two hundred times, he in reality adds nothing to the value of the

tive expense. The expense, on the contrary, laid out in employing
farmers and country labourers, over and above continuing the ex-

whole annual amount of the rude produce. The working of that
lace costs him, perhaps, two years labour. The £30 which he gets

istence of its own value, produces a new value the rent of the
landlord. It is, therefore, a productive expense.

for it when it is finished, is no more than the repayment of the
subsistence which he advances to himself during the two years

Mercantile stock is equally barren and unproductive with manufacturing stock. It only continues the existence of its own value,

that he is employed about it. The value which, by every day’s,
month’s, or year’s labour, he adds to the flax, does no more than

without producing any new value. Its profits are only the repay-

replace the value of his own consumption during that day, month,

543

The Wealth of Nations
or year. At no moment of time, therefore, does he add any thing
to the value of the whole annual amount of the rude produce of

funds destined for their own subsistence, and yet augment, at the
same time, the revenue and wealth of their society. Over and above

the land: the portion of that produce which he is continually consuming, being always equal to the value which he is continually

what is destined for their own subsistence, their industry annually
affords a neat produce, of which the augmentation necessarily aug-

producing. The extreme poverty of the greater part of the persons
employed in this expensive, though trifling manufacture, may sat-

ments the revenue and wealth of their society. Nations, therefore,
which, like France or England, consist in a great measure, of pro-

isfy us that the price of their work does not, in ordinary cases,
exceed the value of their subsistence. It is otherwise with the work

prietors and cultivators, can be enriched by industry and enjoyment. Nations, on the contrary, which, like Holland and

of farmers and country labourers. The rent of the landlord is a
value which, in ordinary cases, it is continually producing over

Hamburgh, are composed chiefly of merchants, artificers, and
manufacturers, can grow rich only through parsimony and priva-

and above replacing, in the most complete manner, the whole
consumption, the whole expense laid out upon the employment

tion. As the interest of nations so differently circumstanced is very
different, so is likewise the common character of the people. In

and maintenance both of the workmen and of their employer.
Artificers, manufacturers, and merchants, can augment the rev-

those of the former kind, liberality, frankness, and good fellowship, naturally make a part of their common character; in the lat-

enue and wealth of their society by parsimony only; or, as it is
expressed in this system, by privation, that is, by depriving them-

ter, narrowness, meanness, and a selfish disposition, averse to all
social pleasure and enjoyment.

selves of a part of the funds destined for their own subsistence.
They annually reproduce nothing but those funds. Unless, there-

The unproductive class, that of merchants, artificers, and manufacturers, is maintained and employed altogether at the expense of

fore, they annually save some part of them, unless they annually
deprive themselves of the enjoyment of some part of them, the

the two other classes, of that of proprietors, and of that of cultivators. They furnish it both with the materials of its work, and with

revenue and wealth of their society can never be, in the smallest
degree, augmented by means of their industry. Farmers and coun-

the fund of its subsistence, with the corn and cattle which it consumes while it is employed about that work. The proprietors and

try labourers, on the contrary, may enjoy completely the whole

cultivators finally pay both the wages of all the workmen of the

544

Adam Smith
unproductive class, and the profits of all their employers. Those
workmen and their employers are properly the servants of the pro-

tive class costs either the proprietors or themselves. The industry of
merchants, artificers, and manufacturers, though in its own nature

prietors and cultivators. They are only servants who work without
doors, as menial servants work within. Both the one and the other,

altogether unproductive, yet contributes in this manner indirectly
to increase the produce of the land. It increases the productive pow-

however, are equally maintained at the expense of the same masters. The labour of both is equally unproductive. It adds nothing

ers of productive labour, by leaving it at liberty to confine itself to its
proper employment, the cultivation of land; and the plough goes

to the value of the sum total of the rude produce of the land.
Instead of increasing the value of that sum total, it is a charge and

frequently the easier and the better, by means of the labour of the
man whose business is most remote from the plough.

expense which must be paid out of it.
The unproductive class, however, is not only useful, but greatly

It can never be the interest of the proprietors and cultivators, to
restrain or to discourage, in any respect, the industry of merchants,

useful, to the other two classes. By means of the industry of merchants, artificers, and manufacturers, the proprietors and cultiva-

artificers, and manufacturers. The greater the liberty which this
unproductive class enjoys, the greater will be the competition in

tors can purchase both the foreign goods and the manufactured
produce of their own country, which they have occasion for, with

all the different trades which compose it, and the cheaper will the
other two classes be supplied, both with foreign goods and with

the produce of a much smaller quantity of their own labour, than
what they would be obliged to employ, if they were to attempt, in

the manufactured produce of their own country.
It can never be the interest of the unproductive class to oppress

an awkward and unskilful manner, either to import the one, or to
make the other, for their own use. By means of the unproductive

the other two classes. It is the surplus produce of the land, or what
remains after deducting the maintenance, first of the cultivators,

class, the cultivators are delivered from many cares, which would
otherwise distract their attention from the cultivation of land. The

and afterwards of the proprietors, that maintains and employs the
unproductive class. The greater this surplus, the greater must like-

superiority of produce, which in consequence of this undivided attention, they are enabled to raise, is fully sufficient to pay the whole

wise be the maintenance and employment of that class. The establishment of perfect justice, of perfect liberty, and of perfect equal-

expense which the maintenance and employment of the unproduc-

ity, is the very simple secret which most effectually secures the

545

The Wealth of Nations
highest degree of prosperity to all the three classes.
The merchants, artificers, and manufacturers of those mercan-

same thing, with the price of which those commodities are purchased. Such duties could only serve to discourage the increase of

tile states, which, like Holland and Hamburgh, consist chiefly of
this unproductive class, are in the same manner maintained and

that surplus produce, and consequently the improvement and
cultivation of their own land. The most effectual expedient, on

employed altogether at the expense of the proprietors and cultivators of land. The only difference is, that those proprietors and

the contrary, for raising the value of that surplus produce, for encouraging its increase, and consequently the improvement and

cultivators are, the greater part of them, placed at a most inconvenient distance from the merchants, artificers, and manufacturers,

cultivation of their own land, would be to allow the most perfect
freedom to the trade of all such mercantile nations.

whom they supply with the materials of their work and the fund
of their subsistence; are the inhabitants of other countries, and the

This perfect freedom of trade would even be the most effectual
expedient for supplying them, in due time, with all the artificers,

subjects of other governments.
Such mercantile states, however, are not only useful, but greatly

manufacturers, and merchants, whom they wanted at home; and
for filling up, in the properest and most advantageous manner,

useful, to the inhabitants of those other countries. They fill up, in
some measure, a very important void; and supply the place of the

that very important void which they felt there.
The continual increase of the surplus produce of their land would,

merchants, artificers, and manufacturers, whom the inhabitants
of those countries ought to find at home, but whom, from some

in due time, create a greater capital than what would be employed
with the ordinary rate of profit in the improvement and cultivation

defect in their policy, they do not find at home.
It can never be the interest of those landed nations, if I may call

of land; and the surplus part of it would naturally turn itself to the
employment of artificers and manufacturers, at home. But these

them so, to discourage or distress the industry of such mercantile
states, by imposing high duties upon their trade, or upon the com-

artificers and manufacturers, finding at home both the materials of
their work and the fund of their subsistence, might immediately,

modities which they furnish. Such duties, by rendering those commodities dearer, could serve only to sink the real value of the sur-

even with much less art and skill be able to work as cheap as the
little artificers and manufacturers of such mercantile states, who

plus produce of their own land, with which, or, what comes to the

had both to bring from a greater distance. Even though, from want

546

Adam Smith
of art and skill, they might not for some time be able to work as
cheap, yet, finding a market at home, they might be able to sell their

an advantage of the same kind over those of mercantile nations,
which its artificers and manufacturers had over the artificers and

work there as cheap as that of the artificers and manufacturers of
such mercantile states, which could not be brought to that market

manufacturers of such nations; the advantage of finding at home
that cargo, and those stores and provisions, which the others were

but from so great a distance; and as their art and skill improved,
they would soon be able to sell it cheaper. The artificers and manu-

obliged to seek for at a distance. With inferior art and skill in
navigation, therefore, they would be able to sell that cargo as cheap

facturers of such mercantile states, therefore, would immediately be
rivalled in the market of those landed nations, and soon after un-

in foreign markets as the merchants of such mercantile nations;
and with equal art and skill they would be able to sell it cheaper.

dersold and justled out of it altogether. The cheapness of the manufactures of those landed nations, in consequence of the gradual im-

They would soon, therefore, rival those mercantile nations in this
branch of foreign trade, and, in due time, would justle them out

provements of art and skill, would, in due time, extend their sale
beyond the home market, and carry them to many foreign markets,

of it altogether.
According to this liberal and generous system, therefore, the

from which they would, in the same manner, gradually justle out
many of the manufacturers of such mercantile nations.

most advantageous method in which a landed nation can raise up
artificers, manufacturers, and merchants of its own, is to grant the

This continual increase, both of the rude and manufactured
produce of those landed nations, would, in due time, create a

most perfect freedom of trade to the artificers, manufacturers, and
merchants of all other nations. It thereby raises the value of the

greater capital than could, with the ordinary rate of profit, be
employed either in agriculture or in manufactures. The surplus of

surplus produce of its own land, of which the continual increase
gradually establishes a fund, which, in due time, necessarily raises

this capital would naturally turn itself to foreign trade and be
employed in exporting, to foreign countries, such parts of the rude

up all the artificers, manufacturers, and merchants, whom it has
occasion for.

and manufactured produce of its own country, as exceeded the
demand of the home market. In the exportation of the produce of

When a landed nation on the contrary, oppresses, either by high
duties or by prohibitions, the trade of foreign nations, it necessar-

their own country, the merchants of a landed nation would have

ily hurts its own interest in two different ways. First, by raising the

547

The Wealth of Nations
price of all foreign goods, and of all sorts of manufactures, it necessarily sinks the real value of the surplus produce of its own land,

them. By raising up too hastily one species of industry, it would
depress another more valuable species of industry. By raising up too

with which, or, what comes to the same thing, with the price of
which, it purchases those foreign goods and manufactures. Sec-

hastily a species of industry which duly replaces the stock which
employs it, together with the ordinary profit, it would depress a

ondly, by giving a sort of monopoly of the home market to its
own merchants, artificers, and manufacturers, it raises the rate of

species of industry which, over and above replacing that stock, with
its profit, affords likewise a neat produce, a free rent to the landlord.

mercantile and manufacturing profit, in proportion to that of agricultural profit; and, consequently, either draws from agriculture

It would depress productive labour, by encouraging too hastily that
labour which is altogether barren and unproductive.

a part of the capital which had before been employed in it, or
hinders from going to it a part of what would otherwise have gone

In what manner, according to this system, the sum total of the
annual produce of the land is distributed among the three classes

to it. This policy, therefore, discourages agriculture in two different ways; first, by sinking the real value of its produce, and thereby

above mentioned, and in what manner the labour of the unproductive class does no more than replace the value of its own con-

lowering the rate of its profits; and, secondly, by raising the rate of
profit in all other employments. Agriculture is rendered less ad-

sumption, without increasing in any respect the value of that sum
total, is represented by Mr Quesnai, the very ingenious and pro-

vantageous, and trade and manufactures more advantageous, than
they otherwise would be; and every man is tempted by his own

found author of this system, in some arithmetical formularies.
The first of these formularies, which, by way of eminence, he pe-

interest to turn, as much as he can, both his capital and his industry from the former to the latter employments.

culiarly distinguishes by the name of the Economical Table, represents the manner in which he supposes this distribution takes place,

Though, by this oppressive policy, a landed nation should be able
to raise up artificers, manufacturers, and merchants of its own, some-

in a state of the most perfect liberty, and, therefore, of the highest
prosperity; in a state where the annual produce is such as to afford

what sooner than it could do by the freedom of trade; a matter,
however, which is not a little doubtful; yet it would raise them up, if

the greatest possible neat produce, and where each class enjoys its
proper share of the whole annual produce. Some subsequent for-

one may say so, prematurely, and before it was perfectly ripe for

mularies represent the manner in which he supposes this distribu-

548

Adam Smith
tion is made in different states of restraint and regulation; in which,
either the class of proprietors, or the barren and unproductive

serves, to all appearance at least, the most perfect state of health
under a vast variety of different regimens; even under some which

class, is more favoured than the class of cultivators; and in which
either the one or the other encroaches, more or less, upon the

are generally believed to be very far from being perfectly wholesome. But the healthful state of the human body, it would seem,

share which ought properly to belong to this productive class.
Every such encroachment, every violation of that natural distri-

contains in itself some unknown principle of preservation, capable
either of preventing or of correcting, in many respects, the bad

bution, which the most perfect liberty would establish, must, according to this system, necessarily degrade, more or less, from one

effects even of a very faulty regimen. Mr Quesnai, who was himself a physician, and a very speculative physician, seems to have

year to another, the value and sum total of the annual produce,
and must necessarily occasion a gradual declension in the real

entertained a notion of the same kind concerning the political
body, and to have imagined that it would thrive and prosper only

wealth and revenue of the society; a declension, of which the
progress must be quicker or slower, according to the degree of this

under a certain precise regimen, the exact regimen of perfect liberty and perfect justice. He seems not to have considered, that in

encroachment, according as that natural distribution, which the
most perfect liberty would establish, is more or less violated. Those

the political body, the natural effort which every man is continually making to better his own condition, is a principle of preserva-

subsequent formularies represent the different degrees of declension which, according to this system, correspond to the different

tion capable of preventing and correcting, in many respects, the
bad effects of a political economy, in some degree both partial and

degrees in which this natural distribution of things is violated.
Some speculative physicians seem to have imagined that the

oppressive. Such a political economy, though it no doubt retards
more or less, is not always capable of stopping altogether, the natural

health of the human body could be preserved only by a certain
precise regimen of diet and exercise, of which every, the smallest

progress of a nation towards wealth and prosperity, and still less of
making it go backwards. If a nation could not prosper without the

violation, necessarily occasioned some degree of disease or disorder proportionate to the degree of the violation. Experience, how-

enjoyment of perfect liberty and perfect justice, there is not in the
world a nation which could ever have prospered. In the political

ever, would seem to shew, that the human body frequently pre-

body, however, the wisdom of nature has fortunately made ample

549

The Wealth of Nations
provision for remedying many of the bad effects of the folly and
injustice of man; it the same manner as it has done in the natural

unproductive.
Secondly, it seems, on this account, altogether improper to con-

body, for remedying those of his sloth and intemperance.
The capital error of this system, however, seems to lie in its

sider artificers, manufacturers, and merchants, in the same light
as menial servants. The labour of menial servants does not con-

representing the class of artificers, manufacturers, and merchants,
as altogether barren and unproductive. The following observa-

tinue the existence of the fund which maintains and employs them.
Their maintenance and employment is altogether at the expense

tions may serve to shew the impropriety of this representation: —
First, this class, it is acknowledged, reproduces annually the value

of their masters, and the work which they perform is not of a
nature to repay that expense. That work consists in services which

of its own annual consmnption, and continues, at least, the existence of the stock or capital which maintains and employs it. But,

perish generally in the very instant of their performance, and does
not fix or realize itself in any vendible commodity, which can re-

upon this account alone, the denomination of barren or unproductive should seem to be very improperly applied to it. We should

place the value of their wages and maintenance. The labour, on
the contrary, of artificers, manufacturers, and merchants, natu-

not call a marriage barren or unproductive, though it produced
only a son and a daughter, to replace the father and mother, and

rally does fix and realize itself in some such vendible commodity.
It is upon this account that, in the chapter in which I treat of

though it did not increase the number of the human species, but
only continued it as it was before. Farmers and country labourers,

productive and unproductive labour, I have classed artificers, manufacturers, and merchants among the productive labourers, and

indeed, over and above the stock which maintains and employs
them, reproduce annually a neat produce, a free rent to the land-

menial servants among the barren or unproductive.
Thirdly, it seems, upon every supposition, improper to say, that

lord. As a marriage which affords three children is certainly more
productive than one which affords only two, so the labour of farm-

the labour of artificers, manufacturers, and merchants, does not
increase the real revenue of the society. Though we should sup-

ers and country labourers is certainly more productive than that
of merchants, artificers, and manufacturers. The superior produce

pose, for example, as it seems to be supposed in this system, that
the value of the daily, monthly, and yearly consumption of this

of the one class, however, does not, render the other barren or

class was exactly equal to that of its daily, monthly, and yearly

550

Adam Smith
production; yet it would not from thence follow, that its labour
added nothing to the real revenue, to the real value of the annual

the actually existing value of goods in the market is, in consequence of what he produces, greater than it otherwise would be.

produce of the land and labour of the society. An artificer, for
example, who, in the first six months after harvest, executes ten

When the patrons of this system assert, that the consumption
of artificers, manufacturer’s, and merchants, is equal to the value

pounds worth of work, though he should, in the same time, consume ten pounds worth of corn and other necessaries, yet really

of what they produce, they probably mean no more than that
their revenue, or the fund destined for their consumption, is equal

adds the value of ten pounds to the annual produce of the land
and labour of the society. While he has been consuming a half-

to it. But if they had expressed themselves more accurately, and
only asserted, that the revenue of this class was equal to the value

yearly revenue of ten pounds worth of corn and other necessaries,
he has produced an equal value of work, capable of purchasing,

of what they produced, it might readily have occurred to the reader,
that what would naturally be saved out of this revenue, must nec-

either to himself, or to some other person, an equal half-yearly
revenue. The value, therefore, of what has been consumed and

essarily increase more or less the real wealth of the society. In order, therefore, to make out something like an argument, it was

produced during these six months, is equal, not to ten, but to
twenty pounds. It is possible, indeed, that no more than ten pounds

necessary that they should express themselves as they have done;
and this argument, even supposing things actually were as it seems

worth of this value may ever have existed at any one moment of
time. But if the ten pounds worth of corn and other necessaries

to presume them to be, turns out to be a very inconclusive one.
Fourthly, farmers and country labourers can no more augment,

which were consumed by the artificer, had been consumed by a
soldier, or by a menial servant, the value of that part of the annual

without parsimony, the real revenue, the annual produce of the
land and labour of their society, than artificers, manufacturers,

produce which existed at the end of the six months, would have
been ten pounds less than it actually is in consequence of the labour

and merchants. The annual produce of the land and labour of any
society can be augmented only in two ways; either, first, by some

of the artificer. Though the value of what the artificer produces,
therefore, should not, at any one moment of time, be supposed

improvement in the productive powers of the useful labour actually maintained within it; or, secondly, by some increase in the

greater than the value he consumes, yet, at every moment of time,

quantity of that labour.

551

The Wealth of Nations
The improvement in the productive powers of useful labour
depends, first, upon the improvement in the ability of the work-

country was supposed to consist altogether, as this system seems
to suppose, in the quantity of subsistence which their industry

man; and, secondly, upon that of the machinery with which he
works. But the labour of artificers and manufacturers, as it is ca-

could procure to them; yet, even upon this supposition, the revenue of a trading and manufacturing country must, other things

pable of being more subdivided, and the labour of each workman
reduced to a greater simplicity of operation, than that of farmers

being equal, always be much greater than that of one without
trade or manufactures. By means of trade and manufactures, a

and country labourers; so it is likewise capable of both these sorts
of improvement in a much higher degree {See book i chap. 1.} In

greater quantity of subsistence can be annually imported into a
particular country, than what its own lands, in the actual state of

this respect, therefore, the class of cultivators can have no sort of
advantage over that of artificers and manufacturers.

their cultivation, could afford. The inhabitants of a town, though
they frequently possess no lands of their own, yet draw to them-

The increase in the quantity of useful labour actually employed
within any society must depend altogether upon the increase of

selves, by their industry, such a quantity of the rude produce of
the lands of other people, as supplies them, not only with the

the capital which employs it; and the increase of that capital, again,
must be exactly equal to the amount of the savings from the rev-

materials of their work, but with the fund of their subsistence.
What a town always is with regard to the country in its

enue, either of the particular persons who manage and direct the
employment of that capital, or of some other persons, who lend it

neighbourhood, one independent state or country may frequently
be with regard to other independent states or countries. It is thus

to them. If merchants, artificers, and manufacturers are, as this
system seems to suppose, naturally more inclined to parsimony

that Holland draws a great part of its subsistence from other countries; live cattle from Holstein and Jutland, and corn from almost

and saving than proprietors and cultivators, they are, so far, more
likely to augment the quantity of useful labour employed within

all the different countries of Europe. A small quantity of manufactured produce, purchases a great quantity of rude produce. A

their society, and consequently to increase its real revenue, the
annual produce of its land and labour.

trading and manufacturing country, therefore, naturally purchases,
with a small part of its manufactured produce, a great part of the

Fifthly and lastly, though the revenue of the inhabitants of every

rude produce of other countries; while, on the contrary, a country

552

Adam Smith
without trade and manufactures is generally obliged to purchase,
at the expense of a great part of its rude produce, a very small part

possible, its doctrine seems to be in every respect as just as it is
generous and liberal. Its followers are very numerous; and as men

of the manufactured produce of other countries. The one exports
what can subsist and accommodate but a very few, and imports

are fond of paradoxes, and of appearing to understand what surpasses the comprehensions of ordinary people, the paradox which

the subsistence and accommodation of a great number. The other
exports the accommodation and subsistence of a great number,

it maintains, concerning the unproductive nature of manufacturing labour, has not, perhaps, contributed a little to increase the

and imports that of a very few only. The inhabitants of the one
must always enjoy a much greater quantity of subsistence than

number of its admirers. They have for some years past made a
pretty considerable sect, distinguished in the French republic of

what their own lands, in the actual state of their cultivation, could
afford. The inhabitants of the other must always enjoy a much

letters by the name of the Economists. Their works have certainly
been of some service to their country; not only by bringing into

smaller quantity.
This system, however, with all its imperfections, is perhaps the

general discussion, many subjects which had never been well examined before, but by influencing, in some measure, the public

nearest approximation to the truth that has yet been published
upon the subject of political economy; and is upon that account,

administration in favour of agriculture. It has been in consequence
of their representations, accordingly, that the agriculture of France

well worth the consideration of every man who wishes to examine
with attention the principles of that very important science.

has been delivered from several of the oppressions which it before
laboured under. The term, during which such a lease can be

Though in representing the labour which is employed upon land
as the only productive labour, the notions which it inculcates are,

granted, as will be valid against every future purchaser or proprietor of the land, has been prolonged from nine to twenty-seven

perhaps, too narrow and confined; yet in representing the wealth
of nations as consisting, not in the unconsumable riches of money,

years. The ancient provincial restraints upon the transportation of
corn from one province of the kingdom to another, have been

but in the consumable goods annually reproduced by the labour
of the society, and in representing perfect liberty as the only effec-

entirely taken away; and the liberty of exporting it to all foreign
countries, has been established as the common law of the king-

tual expedient for rendering this annual reproduction the greatest

dom in all ordinary cases. This sect, in their works, which are very

553

The Wealth of Nations
numerous, and which treat not only of what is properly called
Political Economy, or of the nature and causes or the wealth of

age, but of which our posterity will reap the benefit.’
As the political economy of the nations of modern Europe has

nations, but of every other branch of the system of civil government, all follow implicitly, and without any sensible variation, the

been more favourable to manufactures and foreign trade, the industry of the towns, than to agriculture, the industry of the coun-

doctrine of Mr. Qttesnai. There is, upon this account, little variety in the greater part of their works. The most distinct and best

try; so that of other nations has followed a different plan, and has
been more favourable to agriculture than to manufactures and

connected account of this doctrine is to be found in a little book
written by Mr. Mercier de la Riviere, some time intendant of

foreign trade.
The policy of China favours agriculture more than all other em-

Martinico, entitled, The natural and essential Order of Political
Societies. The admiration of this whole sect for their master, who

ployments. In China, the condition of a labourer is said to be as
much superior to that of an artificer, as in most parts of Europe that

was himself a man of the greatest modesty and simplicity, is not
inferior to that of any of the ancient philosophers for the founders

of an artificer is to that of a labourer. In China, the great ambition
of every man is to get possession of a little bit of land, either in

of their respective systems. ‘There have been since the world began,’ says a very diligent and respectable author, the Marquis de

property or in lease; and leases are there said to be granted upon
very moderate terms, and to be sufficiently secured to the lessees.

Mirabeau, ‘three great inventions which have principally given stability to political societies, independent of many other inventions

The Chinese have little respect for foreign trade. Your beggarly commerce! was the language in which the mandarins of Pekin used to

which have enriched and adorned them. The first is the invention
of writing, which alone gives human nature the power of trans-

talk to Mr. De Lange, the Russian envoy, concerning it {See the
Journal of Mr. De Lange, in Bell’s Travels, vol. ii. p. 258, 276, 293.}.

mitting, without alteration, its laws, its contracts, its annals, and
its discoveries. The second is the invention of money, which binds

Except with Japan, the Chinese carry on, themselves, and in their
own bottoms, little or no foreign trade; and it is only into one or

together all the relations between civilized societies. The third is
the economical table, the result of the other two, which completes

two ports of their kingdom that they even admit the ships of foreign nations. Foreign trade, therefore, is, in China, every way con-

them both by perfecting their object; the great discovery of our

fined within a much narrower circle than that to which it would

554

Adam Smith
naturally extend itself, if more freedom was allowed to it, either in
their own ships, or in those of foreign nations.

country of so great extent, as to be alone sufficient to support very
great manufactures, and to admit of very considerable subdivi-

Manufactures, as in a small bulk they frequently contain a great
value, and can upon that account be transported at less expense

sions of labour. The home market of China is, perhaps, in extent,
not much inferior to the market of all the different countries of

from one country to another than most parts of rude produce,
are, in almost all countries, the principal support of foreign trade.

Europe put together. A more extensive foreign trade, however,
which to this great home market added the foreign market of all

In countries, besides, less extensive, and less favourably circumstanced for inferior commerce than China, they generally require

the rest of the world, especially if any considerable part of this
trade was carried on in Chinese ships, could scarce fail to increase

the support of foreign trade. Without an extensive foreign market, they could not well flourish, either in countries so moderately

very much the manufactures of China, and to improve very much
the productive powers of its manufacturing industry. By a more

extensive as to afford but a narrow home market, or in countries
where the communication between one province and another was

extensive navigation, the Chinese would naturally learn the art of
using and constructing, themselves, all the different machines made

so difficult, as to render it impossible for the goods of any particular place to enjoy the whole of that home market which the coun-

use of in other countries, as well as the other improvements of art
and industry which are practised in all the different parts of the

try could afford. The perfection of manufacturing industry, it must
be remembered, depends altogether upon the division of labour;

world. Upon their present plan, they have little opportunity of
improving themselves by the example of any other nation, except

and the degree to which the division of labour can be introduced
into any manufacture, is necessarily regulated, it has already been

that of the Japanese.
The policy of ancient Egypt, too, and that of the Gentoo gov-

shewn, by the extent of the market. But the great extent of the
empire of China, the vast multitude of its inhabitants, the variety

ernment of Indostan, seem to have favoured agriculture more than
all other employments.

of climate, and consequently of productions in its different provinces, and the easy communication by means of water-carriage

Both in ancient Egypt and Indostan, the whole body of the
people was divided into different casts or tribes each of which was

between the greater part of them, render the home market of that

confined, from father to son, to a particular employment, or class

555

The Wealth of Nations
of employments. The son of a priest was necessarily a priest; the
son of a soldier, a soldier; the son of a labourer, a labourer; the son

effect, prohibits them from all distant sea voyages. Both the Egyptians and Indians must have depended almost altogether upon the

of a weaver, a weaver; the son of a tailor, a tailor, etc. In both
countries, the cast of the priests holds the highest rank, and that

navigation of other nations for the exportation of their surplus
produce; and this dependency, as it must have confined the mar-

of the soldiers the next; and in both countries the cast of the farmers and labourers was superior to the casts of merchants and manu-

ket, so it must have discouraged the increase of this surplus produce. It must have discouraged, too, the increase of the manufac-

facturers.
The government of both countries was particularly attentive to

tured produce, more than that of the rude produce. Manufactures
require a much more extensive market than the most important

the interest of agriculture. The works constructed by the ancient
sovereigns of Egypt, for the proper distribution of the waters of

parts of the rude produce of the land. A single shoemaker will
make more than 300 pairs of shoes in the year; and his own family

the Nile, were famous in antiquity, and the ruined remains of
some of them are still the admiration of travellers. Those of the

will not, perhaps, wear out six pairs. Unless, therefore, he has the
custom of, at least, 50 such families as his own, he cannot dispose

same kind which were constructed by the ancient sovereigns of
Indostan, for the proper distribution of the waters of the Ganges,

of the whole product of his own labour. The most numerous class
of artificers will seldom, in a large country, make more than one

as well as of many other rivers, though they have been less celebrated, seem to have been equally great. Both countries, accord-

in 50, or one in a 100, of the whole number of families contained
in it. But in such large countries, as France and England, the num-

ingly, though subject occasionally to dearths, have been famous
for their great fertility. Though both were extremely populous,

ber of people employed in agriculture has, by some authors been
computed at a half, by others at a third and by no author that I

yet, in years of moderate plenty, they were both able to export
great quantities of grain to their neighbours.

know of, at less that a fifth of the whole inhabitants of the country. But as the produce of the agriculture of both France and En-

The ancient Egyptians had a superstitious aversion to the sea;
and as the Gentoo religion does not permit its followers to light a

gland is, the far greater part of it, consumed at home, each person
employed in it must, according to these computations, require

fire, nor consequently to dress any victuals, upon the water, it, in

little more than the custom of one, two, or, at most, of four such

556

Adam Smith
families as his own, in order to dispose of the whole produce of his
own labour. Agriculture, therefore, can support itself under the

vided, have always derived the whole, or by far the most considerable part, of their revenue, from some sort of land tax or land rent.

discouragement of a confined market much better than manufactures. In both ancient Egypt and Indostan, indeed, the confine-

This land tax, or land rent, like the tithe in Europe, consisted in a
certain proportion, a fifth, it is said, of the produce of the land,

ment of the foreign market was in some measure compensated by
the conveniency of many inland navigations, which opened, in

which was either delivered in kind, or paid in money, according to
a certain valuation, and which, therefore, varied from year to year,

the most advantageous manner, the whole extent of the home
market to every part of the produce of every different district of

according to all the variations of the produce. It was natural, therefore, that the sovereigns of those countries should be particularly

those countries. The great extent of Indostan, too, rendered the
home market of that country very great, and sufficient to support

attentive to the interests of agriculture, upon the prosperity or
declension of which immediately depended the yearly increase or

a great variety of manufactures. But the small extent of ancient
Egypt, which was never equal to England, must at all times, have

diminution of their own revenue.
The policy of the ancient republics of Greece, and that of Rome,

rendered the home market of that country too narrow for supporting any great variety of manufactures. Bengal accordingly, the

though it honoured agriculture more than manufactures or foreign trade, yet seems rather to have discouraged the latter employ-

province of Indostan which commonly exports the greatest quantity of rice, has always been more remarkable for the exportation

ments, than to have given any direct or intentional encouragement to the former. In several of the ancient states of Greece, for-

of a great variety of manufactures, than for that of its grain. Ancient Egypt, on the contrary, though it exported some manufac-

eign trade was prohibited altogether; and in several others, the
employments of artificers and manufacturers were considered as

tures, fine linen in particular, as well as some other goods, was
always most distinguished for its great exportation of grain. It was

hurtful to the strength and agility of the human body, as rendering it incapable of those habits which their military and gymnas-

long the granary of the Roman empire.
The sovereigns of China, of ancient Egypt, and of the different

tic exercises endeavoured to form in it, and as thereby disqualifying it, more or less, for undergoing the fatigues and encountering

kingdoms into which Indostan has, at different times, been di-

the dangers of war. Such occupations were considered as fit only

557

The Wealth of Nations
for slaves, and the free citizens of the states were prohibited from
exercising them. Even in those states where no such prohibition

by Mr. Montesquieu, though not richer, have always been wrought
with less expense, and therefore with more profit, than the Turk-

took place, as in Rome and Athens, the great body of the people
were in effect excluded from all the trades which are now com-

ish mines in their neighbourhood. The Turkish mines are wrought
by slaves; and the arms of those slaves are the only machines which

monly exercised by the lower sort of the inhabitants of towns.
Such trades were, at Athens and Rome, all occupied by the slaves

the Turks have ever thought of employing. The Hungarian mines
are wrought by freemen, who employ a great deal of machinery,

of the rich, who exercised them for the benefit of their masters,
whose wealth, power, and protection, made it almost impossible

by which they facilitate and abridge their own labour. From the
very little that is known about the price of manufactures in the

for a poor freeman to find a market for his work, when it came
into competition with that of the slaves of the rich. Slaves, how-

times of the Greeks and Romans, it would appear that those of the
finer sort were excessively dear. Silk sold for its weight in gold. It

ever, are very seldom inventive; and all the most important improvements, either in machinery, or in the arrangement and dis-

was not, indeed, in those times an European manufacture; and as
it was all brought from the East Indies, the distance of the carriage

tribution of work, which facilitate and abridge labour have been
the discoveries of freemen. Should a slave propose any improve-

may in some measure account for the greatness of the price. The
price, however, which a lady, it is said, would sometimes pay for a

ment of this kind, his master would be very apt to consider the
proposal as the suggestion of laziness, and of a desire to save his

piece of very fine linen, seems to have been equally extravagant;
and as linen was always either an European, or at farthest, an Egyp-

own labour at the master’s expense. The poor slave, instead of
reward would probably meet with much abuse, perhaps with some

tian manufacture, this high price can be accounted for only by the
great expense of the labour which must have been employed about

punishment. In the manufactures carried on by slaves, therefore,
more labour must generally have been employed to execute the

It, and the expense of this labour again could arise from nothing
but the awkwardness of the machinery which is made use of. The

same quantity of work, than in those carried on by freemen. The
work of the farmer must, upon that account, generally have been

price of fine woollens, too, though not quite so extravagant, seems,
however, to have been much above that of the present times. Some

dearer than that of the latter. The Hungarian mines, it is remarked

cloths, we are told by Pliny {Plin. 1. ix.c.39.}, dyed in a particular

558

Adam Smith
manner, cost a hundred denarii, or £3:6s:8d. the pound weight.
Others, dyed in another manner, cost a thousand denarii the pound

of manufacturing art and industry, the expense of any one dress
comes to be very moderate, the variety will naturally be very great.

weight, or £33:6s:8d. The Roman pound, it must be remembered,
contained only twelve of our avoirdupois ounces. This high price,

The rich, not being able to distinguish themselves by the expense
of any one dress, will naturally endeavour to do so by the multi-

indeed, seems to have been principally owing to the dye. But had
not the cloths themselves been much dearer than any which are

tude and variety of their dresses.
The greatest and most important branch of the commerce of

made in the present times, so very expensive a dye would not
probably have been bestowed upon them. The disproportion would

every nation, it has already been observed, is that which is carried
on between the inhabitants of the town and those of the country.

have been too great between the value of the accessory and that of
the principal. The price mentioned by the same author {Plin. 1.

The inhabitants of the town draw from the country the rude produce, which constitutes both the materials of their work and the

viii.c.48.}, of some triclinaria, a sort of woollen pillows or cushions made use of to lean upon as they reclined upon their couches

fund of their subsistence; and they pay for this rude produce, by
sending back to the country a certain portion of it manufactured

at table, passes all credibility; some of them being said to have cost
more than £30,000, others more than £300,000. This high price,

and prepared for immediate use. The trade which is carried on
between these two different sets of people, consists ultimately in a

too, is not said to have arisen from the dye. In the dress of the
people of fashion of both sexes, there seems to have been much

certain quantity of rude produce exchanged for a certain quantity
of manufactured produce. The dearer the latter, therefore, the

less variety, it is observed by Dr. Arbuthnot, in ancient than in
modern times; and the very little variety which we find in that of

cheaper the former; and whatever tends in any country to raise
the price of manufactured produce, tends to lower that of the

the ancient statues, confirms his observation. He infers from this,
that their dress must, upon the whole, have been cheaper than

rude produce of the land, and thereby to discourage agriculture.
The smaller the quantity of manufactured produce, which any

ours; but the conclusion does not seem to follow. When the expense of fashionable dress is very great, the variety must be very

given quantity of rude produce, or, what comes to the same thing,
which the price of any given quantity of rude produce, is capable

small. But when, by the improvements in the productive powers

of purchasing, the smaller the exchangeable value of that given

559

The Wealth of Nations
quantity of rude produce; the smaller the encouragement which
either the landlord has to increase its quantity by improving, or

would naturally go to it, or, by extraordinary restraints, to force
from a particular species of industry some share of the capital which

the farmer by cultivating the land. Whatever, besides, tends to
diminish in any country the number of artificers and manufactur-

would otherwise be employed in it, is, in reality, subversive of the
great purpose which it means to promote. It retards, instead of

ers, tends to diminish the home market, the most important of all
markets, for the rude produce of the land, and thereby still further

accelerating the progress of the society towards real wealth and
greatness; and diminishes, instead of increasing, the real value of

to discourage agriculture.
Those systems, therefore, which preferring agriculture to all other

the annual produce of its land and labour.
All systems, either of preference or of restraint, therefore, being

employments, in order to promote it, impose restraints upon
manufactures and foreign trade, act contrary to the very end which

thus completely taken away, the obvious and simple system of
natural liberty establishes itself of its own accord. Every man, as

they propose, and indirectly discourage that very species of industry which they mean to promote. They are so far, perhaps, more

long as he does not violate the laws of justice, is left perfectly free
to pursue his own interest his own way, and to bring both his

inconsistent than even the mercantile system. That system, by
encouraging manufactures and foreign trade more than agricul-

industry and capital into competition with those of any other man,
or order of men. The sovereign is completely discharged from a

ture, turns a certain portion of the capital of the society, from
supporting a more advantageous, to support a less advantageous

duty, in the attempting to perform which he must always be exposed to innumerable delusions, and for the proper performance

species of industry. But still it really, and in the end, encourages
that species of industry which it means to promote. Those agri-

of which, no human wisdom or knowledge could ever be sufficient; the duty of superintending the industry of private people,

cultural systems, on the contrary, really, and in the end, discourage their own favourite species of industry.

and of directing it towards the employments most suitable to the
interests of the society. According to the system of natural liberty,

It is thus that every system which endeavours, either, by extraordinary encouragements to draw towards a particular species

the sovereign has only three duties to attend to; three duties of
great importance, indeed, but plain and intelligible to common

of industry a greater share of the capital of the society than what

understandings: first, the duty of protecting the society from the

560

Adam Smith
violence and invasion of other independent societies; secondly,
the duty of protecting, as far as possible, every member of the

modern governments to mortgage some part of this revenue, or to
contract debts; and what have been the effects of those debts upon

society from the injustice or oppression of every other member of
it, or the duty of establishing an exact administration of justice;

the real wealth, the annual produce of the land and labour of the
society. The following book, therefore, will naturally be divided

and, thirdly, the duty of erecting and maintaining certain public
works, and certain public institutions, which it can never be for

into three chapters.

the interest of any individual, or small number of individuals to
erect and maintain; because the profit could never repay the expense to any individual, or small number of individuals, though it
may frequently do much more than repay it to a great society.
The proper performance of those several duties of the sovereign
necessarily supposes a certain expense; and this expense again necessarily requires a certain revenue to support it. In the following
book, therefore, I shall endeavour to explain, first, what are the
necessary expenses of the sovereign or commonwealth; and which
of those expenses ought to be defrayed by the general contribution of the whole society; and which of them, by that of some
particular part only, or of some particular members of the society:
secondly, what are the different methods in which the whole society may be made to contribute towards defraying the expenses
incumbent on the whole society; and what are the principal advantages and inconveniencies of each of those methods: and thirdly,
what are the reasons and causes which have induced almost all

561

The Wealth of Nations

APPENDIX TO BOOK IV

1779
1780

206
181

55,194
48,315

29,367
19,885

15,287 0 0
13,445 12 6

The two following accounts are subjoined, in order to illustrate

1781

135

33,992

16,593

9,613 15 6

Totals 2,186

550,943

378,347

£165,463 14 0

and confirm what is said in the fifth chapter of the fourth book,
concerning the Tonnage Bounty to the Whit-herring Fishery. The
reader, I believe, may depend upon the accuracy of both accounts.

Sea-sticks
An account of Busses fitted out in Scotland for eleven Years, with
the Number of empty Barrels carried out, and the Number of

But a barrel of sea-sticks
being only reckoned two thirds

Barrels of Herrings caught; also the Bounty, at a Medium, on each
Barrel of Sea-sricks, and on each Barrel when fully packed.
Years Number of Empty Barrels Barrels of Her- Bounty paid on
Busses

carried out rings caught the Busses
£. s. d.

1771
1772

29
168

5,948
41,316

2,832
22,237

2,885 0 0
11,055 7 6

1773
1774

190
240

42,333
59,303

42,055
56,365

12,510 8 6
26,932 2 6

1775
1776

275
294

69,144
76,329

52,879
51,863

19,315 15 0
21,290 7 6

1777
1778

240
220

62,679
56,390

43,313
40,958

17,592 2 6
16,316 2 6

378,347 Bounty, at a medium, for each
barrel of sea-sticks,
£ 0 8 2¼

of a barrel fully packed, one
third to be deducted, which
¹/³deducted 126,115 brings the bounty to
Barrels fully packed
252,231

£ 0 12 3¾

And if the herrings are exported, there is besides a
premium of £ 0 2 8
So the bounty paid by government in money for each
barrel is £ 0 14 11¾
But if to this, the duty of the salt usually taken credit for as expended in curing each barrel, which at a medium, is, of foreign,
one bushel and one-fourth of a bushel, at 10s. a-bushel, be added,

562

Adam Smith
viz 0 12 6
the bounty on each barrel would amount to

£ 1 7 5¾

£ 0 12 3¾
From which deduct 1s. a-barrel, paid at the time they are entered
for home consumption

If the herrings are cured with British salt, it will stand thus, viz.

0 1 0
£ 0 11 3¾

Bounty as before
£ 0 14 11¾
But if to this bounty, the duty on two bushels of Scotch salt, at

But if to the bounty, the the duty on two bushel of Scotch salt, at

1s.6d. per bushel, supposed to be the quantity, at a medium, used
in curing each barrel is added, viz.
0 3 0

1s.6d. per bushel supposed to be the quantity, at a medium, used
in curing each barrel, is added, viz
0 3 0

The bounty on each barrel will amount to

the premium for each barrel entered for home consumption will
be
£ 1 14 3¾

£ 0 17 11¾

And when buss herrings are entered for home consumption in
Scotland, and pay the shilling a barrel of duty, the bounty stands

Though the loss of duties upon herrings exported cannot, per-

thus, to wit, as before
£ 0 12 3¾
From which the shilling a barrel is to be deducted
0 1 0

haps, properly be considered as bounty, that upon herrings entered for home consumption certainly may.

£ 0 11 3¾
An account of the Quantity of Foreign Salt imported into ScotBut to that there is to be added again, the duty of the foreign salt
used curing a barrel of herring viz
0 12 6

land, and of Scotch Salt delivered Duty-free from the Works there,
for the Fishery, from the 5th. of April 1771 to the 5th. of April

So that the premium allowed for each barrel of herrings entered for home consumption is
£ 1 3 9¾

1782 with the Medium of both for one Year.

If the herrings are cured in British salt, it will stand as follows viz.
Bounty on each barrel brought in by the busses, as above

563

The Wealth of Nations
Foreign Salt
PERIOD

BOOK V

Scotch Salt delivered
imported

from the Works

Bushels

Bushels

OF THE REVENUE OF THE SOVEREIGN
OR COMMONWEALTH

From 5th. April 1771 to
5th. April 1782 936,974

168,226

CHAPTER I

Medium for one year 85,159½

15,293¼

OF THE EXPENSES OF THE SOVEREIGN
OR COMMONWEALTH

It is to be observed, that the bushel of foreign salt weighs 48lbs.,
that of British weighs 56lbs. only.

PART I
Of the Expense of Defence

T

HE FIRST DUTY of the sovereign, that of protecting the

society from the violence and invasion of other independent societies, can be performed only by means of a

military force. But the expense both of preparing this military
force in time of peace, and of employing it in time of war, is very
different in the different states of society, in the different periods
of improvement.
Among nations of hunters, the lowest and rudest state of society, such as we find it among the native tribes of North America,

564

Adam Smith
every man is a warrior, as well as a hunter. When he goes to war,
either to defend his society, or to revenge the injuries which have

time of war. Whether it marches as an army, or moves about as a
company of herdsmen, the way of life is nearly the same, though

been done to it by other societies, he maintains himself by his own
labour, in the same manner as when he lives at home. His society

the object proposed by it be very different. They all go to war
together, therefore, and everyone does as well as he can. Among

(for in this state of things there is properly neither sovereign nor
commonwealth) is at no sort of expense, either to prepare him for

the Tartars, even the women have been frequently known to engage in battle. If they conquer, whatever belongs to the hostile

the field, or to maintain him while he is in it.
Among nations of shepherds, a more advanced state of society,

tribe is the recompence of the victory; but if they are vanquished,
all is lost; and not only their herds and flocks, but their women

such as we find it among the Tartars and Arabs, every man is, in
the same manner, a warrior. Such nations have commonly no fixed

and children become the booty of the conqueror. Even the greater
part of those who survive the action are obliged to submit to him

habitation, but live either in tents, or in a sort of covered waggons,
which are easily transported from place to place. The whole tribe,

for the sake of immediate subsistence. The rest are commonly dissipated and dispersed in the desert.

or nation, changes its situation according to the different seasons
of the year, as well as according to other accidents. When its herds

The ordinary life, the ordinary exercise of a Tartar or Arab, prepares him sufficiently for war. Running, wrestling, cudgel-play-

and flocks have consumed the forage of one part of the country, it
removes to another, and from that to a third. In the dry season, it

ing, throwing the javelin, drawing the bow, etc. are the common
pastimes of those who live in the open air, and are all of them the

comes down to the banks of the rivers; in the wet season, it retires
to the upper country. When such a nation goes to war, the war-

images of war. When a Tartar or Arab actually goes to war, he is
maintained by his own herds and flocks, which he carries with

riors will not trust their herds and flocks to the feeble defence of
their old men, their women and children; and their old men, their

him, in the same manner as in peace. His chief or sovereign (for
those nations have all chiefs or sovereigns) is at no sort of expense

women and children, will not be left behind without defence, and
without subsistence. The whole nation, besides, being accustomed

in preparing him for the field; and when he is in it, the chance of
plunder is the only pay which he either expects or requires.

to a wandering life, even in time of peace, easily takes the field in

An army of hunters can seldom exceed two or three hundred

565

The Wealth of Nations
men. The precarious subsistence which the chace affords, could
seldom allow a greater number to keep together for any consider-

should ever become shepherds, their neighbourhood would be
much more dangerous to the European colonies than it is at present.

able time. An army of shepherds, on the contrary, may sometimes
amount to two or three hundred thousand. As long as nothing

In a yet more advanced state of society, among those nations of
husbandmen who have little foreign commerce, and no other

stops their progress, as long as they can go on from one district, of
which they have consumed the forage, to another, which is yet

manufactures but those coarse and household ones, which almost
every private family prepares for its own use, every man, in the

entire; there seems to be scarce any limit to the number who can
march on together. A nation of hunters can never be formidable

same manner, either is a warrior, or easily becomes such. Those
who live by agriculture generally pass the whole day in the open

to the civilized nations in their neighbourhood; a nation of shepherds may. Nothing can be more contemptible than an Indian

air, exposed to all the inclemencies of the seasons. The hardiness
of their ordinary life prepares them for the fatigues of war, to some

war in North America; nothing, on the contrary, can be more
dreadful than a Tartar invasion has frequently been in Asia. The

of which their necessary occupations bear a great analogy. The
necessary occupation of a ditcher prepares him to work in the

judgment of Thucydides, that both Europe and Asia could not
resist the Scythians united, has been verified by the experience of

trenches, and to fortify a camp, as well as to inclose a field. The
ordinary pastimes of such husbandmen are the same as those of

all ages. The inhabitants of the extensive, but defenceless plains of
Scythia or Tartary, have been frequently united under the domin-

shepherds, and are in the same manner the images of war. But as
husbandmen have less leisure than shepherds, they are not so fre-

ion of the chief of some conquering horde or clan; and the havock
and devastation of Asia have always signalized their union. The

quently employed in those pastimes. They are soldiers but soldiers
not quite so much masters of their exercise. Such as they are, how-

inhabitants of the inhospitable deserts of Arabia, the other great
nation of shepherds, have never been united but once, under

ever, it seldom costs the sovereign or commonwealth any expense
to prepare them for the field.

Mahomet and his immediate successors. Their union, which was
more the effect of religious enthusiasm than of conquest, was sig-

Agriculture, even in its rudest and lowest state, supposes a settlement, some sort of fixed habitation, which cannot be abandoned

nalized in the same manner. If the hunting nations of America

without great loss. When a nation of mere husbandmen, there-

566

Adam Smith
fore, goes to war, the whole people cannot take the field together.
The old men, the women and children, at least, must remain at

European monarchies, which were founded upon the ruins of the
Roman empire, both before, and for some time after, the estab-

home, to take care of the habitation. All the men of the military
age, however, may take the field, and in small nations of this kind,

lishment of what is properly called the feudal law, the great lords,
with all their immediate dependents, used to serve the crown at

have frequently done so. In every nation, the men of the military
age are supposed to amount to about a fourth or a fifth part of the

their own expense. In the field, in the same manner as at home,
they maintained themselves by their own revenue, and not by any

whole body of the people. If the campaign, too, should begin after
seedtime, and end before harvest, both the husbandman and his

stipend or pay which they received from the king upon that particular occasion.

principal labourers can be spared from the farm without much
loss. He trusts that the work which must be done in the mean

In a more advanced state of society, two different causes contribute to render it altogether impossible that they who take the

time, can be well enough executed by the old men, the women,
and the children. He is not unwilling, therefore, to serve without

field should maintain themselves at their own expense. Those two
causes are, the progress of manufactures, and the improvement in

pay during a short campaign; and it frequently costs the sovereign
or commonwealth as little to maintain him in the field as to pre-

the art of war.
Though a husbandman should be employed in an expedition,

pare him for it. The citizens of all the different states of ancient
Greece seem to have served in this manner till after the second

provided it begins after seedtime, and ends before harvest, the
interruption of his business will not always occasion any consider-

Persian war; and the people of Peloponnesus till after the
Peloponnesian war. The Peloponnesians, Thucydides observes,

able diminution of his revenue. Without the intervention of his
labour, Nature does herself the greater part of the work which

generally left the field in the summer, and returned home to reap
the harvest. The Roman people, under their kings, and during the

remains to be done. But the moment that an artificer, a smith, a
carpenter, or a weaver, for example, quits his workhouse, the sole

first ages of the republic, served in the same manner. It was not till
the seige of Veii, that they who staid at home began to contribute

source of his revenue is completely dried up. Nature does nothing
for him; he does all for himself. When he takes the field, therefore,

something towards maintaining those who went to war. In the

in defence of the public, as he has no revenue to maintain himself,

567

The Wealth of Nations
he must necessarily be maintained by the public. But in a country,
of which a great part of the inhabitants are artificers and manufac-

ate dependents, was, after a certain period, universally exchanged
for a payment in money, which was employed to maintain those

turers, a great part of the people who go to war must be drawn
from those classes, and must, therefore, be maintained by the public

who served in their stead.
The number of those who can go to war, in proportion to the

as long as they are employed in its service,
When the art of war, too, has gradually grown up to be a very

whole number of the people, is necessarily much smaller in a civilized than in a rude state of society. In a civilized society, as the

intricate and complicated science; when the event of war ceases to
be determined, as in the first ages of society, by a single irregular

soldiers are maintained altogether by the labour of those who are
not soldiers, the number of the former can never exceed what the

skirmish or battle; but when the contest is generally spun out
through several different campaigns, each of which lasts during

latter can maintain, over and above maintaining, in a manner suitable to their respective stations, both themselves and the other

the greater part of the year; it becomes universally necessary that
the public should maintain those who serve the public in war, at

officers of government and law, whom they are obliged to maintain. In the little agrarian states of ancient Greece, a fourth or a

least while they are employed in that service. Whatever, in time of
peace, might be the ordinary occupation of those who go to war,

fifth part of the whole body of the people considered the themselves as soldiers, and would sometimes, it is said, take the field.

so very tedious and expensive a service would otherwise be by far
too heavy a burden upon them. After the second Persian war, ac-

Among the civilized nations of modern Europe, it is commonly
computed, that not more than the one hundredth part of the in-

cordingly, the armies of Athens seem to have been generally composed of mercenary troops, consisting, indeed, partly of citizens,

habitants of any country can be employed as soldiers, without
ruin to the country which pays the expense of their service.

but partly, too, of foreigners; and all of them equally hired and
paid at the expense of the state. From the time of the siege of Veii,

The expense of preparing the army for the field seems not to
have become considerable in any nation, till long after that of

the armies of Rome received pay for their service during the time
which they remained in the field. Under the feudal governments,

maintaining it in the field had devolved entirely upon the sovereign or commonwealth. In all the different republics of ancient

the military service, both of the great lords, and of their immedi-

Greece, to learn his military exercises, was a necessary part of edu-

568

Adam Smith
cation imposed by the state upon every free citizen. In every city
there seems to have been a public field, in which, under the pro-

tion by which he gained his livelihood, considered himself, upon
all ordinary occasions, as fit likewise to exercise the trade of a sol-

tection of the public magistrate, the young people were taught
their different exercises by different masters. In this very simple

dier, and, upon many extraordinary occasions, as bound to exercise it.

institution consisted the whole expense which any Grecian state
seems ever to have been at, in preparing its citizens for war. In

The art of war, however, as it is certainly the noblest of all arts,
so, in the progress of improvement, it necessarily becomes one of

ancient Rome, the exercises of the Campus Martius answered the
same purpose with those of the Gymnasium in ancient Greece.

the most complicated among them. The state of the mechanical,
as well as some other arts, with which it is necessarily connected,

Under the feudal governments, the many public ordinances, that
the citizens of every district should practise archery, as well as sev-

determines the degree of perfection to which it is capable of being
carried at any particular time. But in order to carry it to this de-

eral other military exercises, were intended for promoting the same
purpose, but do not seem to have promoted it so well. Either from

gree of perfection, it is necessary that it should become the sole or
principal occupation of a particular class of citizens; and the divi-

want of interest in the officers entrusted with the execution of
those ordinances, or from some other cause, they appear to have

sion of labour is as necessary for the improvement of this, as of
every other art. Into other arts, the division of labour is naturally

been universally neglected; and in the progress of all those governments, military exercises seem to have gone gradually into disuse

introduced by the prudence of individuals, who find that they
promote their private interest better by confining themselves to a

among the great body of the people.
In the republics of ancient Greece and Rome, during the whole

particular trade, than by exercising a great number. But it is the
wisdom of the state only, which can render the trade of a soldier a

period of their existence, and under the feudal governments, for a
considerable time after their first establishment, the trade of a sol-

particular trade, separate and distinct from all others. A private
citizen, who, in time of profound peace, and without any particu-

dier was not a separate, distinct trade, which constituted the sole
or principal occupation of a particular class of citizens; every sub-

lar encouragement from the public, should spend the greater part
of his time in military exercises, might, no doubt, both improve

ject of the state, whatever might be the ordinary trade or occupa-

himself very much in them, and amuse himself very well; but he

569

The Wealth of Nations
certainly would not promote his own interest. It is the wisdom of
the state only, which can render it for his interest to give up the

the state takes some new measure for the public defence, the natural habits of the people render them altogether incapable of de-

greater part of his time to this peculiar occupation; and states have
not always had this wisdom, even when their circumstances had

fending themselves.
In these circumstances, there seem to be but two methods by

become such, that the preservation of their existence required that
they should have it.

which the state can make any tolerable provision for the public
defence.

A shepherd has a great deal of leisure; a husbandman, in the
rude state of husbandry, has some; an artificer or manufacturer

It may either, first, by means of a very rigorous police, and in
spite of the whole bent of the interest, genius, and inclinations of

has none at all. The first may, without any loss, employ a great
deal of his time in martial exercises; the second may employ some

the people, enforce the practice of military exercises, and oblige
either all the citizens of the military age, or a certain number of

part of it; but the last cannot employ a single hour in them without some loss, and his attention to his own interest naturally leads

them, to join in some measure the trade of a soldier to whatever
other trade or profession they may happen to carry on.

him to neglect them altogether. Those improvements in husbandry,
too, which the progress of arts and manufactures necessarily in-

Or, secondly, by maintaining and employing a certain number
of citizens in the constant practice of military exercises, it may

troduces, leave the husbandman as little leisure as the artificer.
Military exercises come to be as much neglected by the inhabit-

render the trade of a soldier a particular trade, separate and distinct from all others.

ants of the country as by those of the town, and the great body of
the people becomes altogether unwarlike. That wealth, at the same

If the state has recourse to the first of those two expedients, its
military force is said to consist in a militia; if to the second, it is

time, which always follows the improvements of agriculture and
manufactures, and which, in reality, is no more than the accumu-

said to consist in a standing army. The practice of military exercises is the sole or principal occupation of the soldiers of a stand-

lated produce of those improvements, provokes the invasion of all
their neighbours. An industrious, and, upon that account, a wealthy

ing army, and the maintenance or pay which the state affords them
is the principal and ordinary fund of their subsistence. The prac-

nation, is of all nations the most likely to be attacked; and unless

tice of military exercises is only the occasional occupation of the

570

Adam Smith
soldiers of a militia, and they derive the principal and ordinary
fund of their subsistence from some other occupation. In a mili-

manent officers.
Before the invention of fire-arms, that army was superior in which

tia, the character of the labourer, artificer, or tradesman, predominates over that of the soldier; in a standing army, that of the sol-

the soldiers had, each individually, the greatest skill and dexterity in
the use of their arms. Strength and agility of body were of the high-

dier predominates over every other character; and in this distinction seems to consist the essential difference between those two

est consequence, and commonly determined the fate of battles. But
this skill and dexterity in the use of their arms could be acquired

different species of military force.
Militias have been of several different kinds. In some countries,

only, in the same manner as fencing is at present, by practising, not
in great bodies, but each man separately, in a particular school, un-

the citizens destined for defending the state seem to have been
exercised only, without being, if I may say so, regimented; that is,

der a particular master, or with his own particular equals and companions. Since the invention of fire-arms, strength and agility of

without being divided into separate and distinct bodies of troops,
each of which performed its exercises under its own proper and

body, or even extraordinary dexterity and skill in the use of arms,
though they are far from being of no consequence, are, however, of

permanent officers. In the republics of ancient Greece and Rome,
each citizen, as long as he remained at home, seems to have prac-

less consequence. The nature of the weapon, though it by no means
puts the awkward upon a level with the skilful, puts him more nearly

tised his exercises, either separately and independently, or with
such of his equals as he liked best; and not to have been attached

so than he ever was before. All the dexterity and skill, it is supposed,
which are necessary for using it, can be well enough acquired by

to any particular body of troops, till he was actually called upon to
take the field. In other countries, the militia has not only been

practising in great bodies.
Regularity, order, and prompt obedience to command, are quali-

exercised, but regimented. In England, in Switzerland, and, I believe, in every other country of modern Europe, where any imper-

ties which, in modern armies, are of more importance towards
determining the fate of battles, than the dexterity and skill of the

fect military force of this kind has been established, every militiaman is, even in time of peace, attached to a particular body of

soldiers in the use of their arms. But the noise of fire-arms, the
smoke, and the invisible death to which every man feels himself

troops, which performs its exercises under its own proper and per-

every moment exposed, as soon as he comes within cannon-shot,

571

The Wealth of Nations
and frequently a long time before the battle can be well said to be
engaged, must render it very difficult to maintain any consider-

it was in ancient times, yet the acknowledged superiority of the
Prussian troops, owing, it is said, very much to their superior ex-

able degree of this regularity, order, and prompt obedience, even
in the beginning of a modern battle. In an ancient battle, there

pertness in their exercise, may satisfy us that it is, even at this day,
of very considerable consequence.

was no noise but what arose from the human voice; there was no
smoke, there was no invisible cause of wounds or death. Every

The soldiers, who are bound to obey their officer only once aweek, or once a-month, and who are at all other times at liberty to

man, till some mortal weapon actually did approach him, saw
clearly that no such weapon was near him. In these circumstances,

manage their own affairs their own way, without being, in any
respect, accountable to him, can never be under the same awe in

and among troops who had some confidence in their own skill
and dexterity in the use of their arms, it must have been a good

his presence, can never have the same disposition to ready obedience, with those whose whole life and conduct are every day di-

deal less difficult to preserve some degree of regularity and order,
not only in the beginning, but through the whole progress of an

rected by him, and who every day even rise and go to bed, or at
least retire to their quarters, according to his orders. In what is

ancient battle, and till one of the two armies was fairly defeated.
But the habits of regularity, order, and prompt obedience to com-

called discipline, or in the habit of ready obedience, a militia must
always be still more inferior to a standing army, than it may some-

mand, can be acquired only by troops which are exercised in great
bodies.

times be in what is called the manual exercise, or in the management and use of its arms. But, in modern war, the habit of ready

A militia, however, in whatever manner it may be either disciplined or exercised, must always be much inferior to a well disci-

and instant obedience is of much greater consequence than a considerable superiority in the management of arms.

plined and well exercised standing army.
The soldiers who are exercised only once a week, or once a-

Those militias which, like the Tartar or Arab militia, go to war
under the same chieftains whom they are accustomed to obey in

month, can never be so expert in the use of their arms, as those
who are exercised every day, or every other day; and though this

peace, are by far the best. In respect for their officers, in the habit
of ready obedience, they approach nearest to standing armies The

circumstance may not be of so much consequence in modern, as

Highland militia, when it served under its own chieftains, had

572

Adam Smith
some advantage of the same kind. As the Highlanders, however,
were not wandering, but stationary shepherds, as they had all a

respect, a match for that standing army, of which the valour appeared, in the last war at least, not inferior to that of the hardiest

fixed habitation, and were not, in peaceable times, accustomed to
follow their chieftain from place to place; so, in time of war, they

veterans of France and Spain.
This distinction being well understood, the history of all ages, it

were less willing to follow him to any considerable distance, or to
continue for any long time in the field. When they had acquired

will be found, hears testimony to the irresistible superiority which
a well regulated standing army has over a militia.

any booty, they were eager to return home, and his authority was
seldom sufficient to detain them. In point of obedience, they were

One of the first standing armies, of which we have any distinct
account in any well authenticated history, is that of Philip of

always much inferior to what is reported of the Tartars and Arabs.
As the Highlanders, too, from their stationary life, spend less of

Macedon. His frequent wars with the Thracians, Illyrians,
Thessalians, and some of the Greek cities in the neighbourhood

their time in the open air, they were always less accustomed to
military exercises, and were less expert in the use of their arms

of Macedon, gradually formed his troops, which in the beginning
were probably militia, to the exact discipline of a standing army.

than the Tartars and Arabs are said to be.
A militia of any kind, it must be observed, however, which has

When he was at peace, which he was very seldom, and never for
any long time together, he was careful not to disband that army. It

served for several successive campaigns in the field, becomes in
every respect a standing army. The soldiers are every day exercised

vanquished and subdued, after a long and violent struggle, indeed, the gallant and well exercised militias of the principal re-

in the use of their arms, and, being constantly under the command of their officers, are habituated to the same prompt obedi-

publics of ancient Greece; and afterwards, with very little struggle,
the effeminate and ill exercised militia of the great Persian empire.

ence which takes place in standing armies. What they were before
they took the field, is of little importance. They necessarily be-

The fall of the Greek republics, and of the Persian empire was the
effect of the irresistible superiority which a standing arm has over

come in every respect a standing army, after they have passed a
few campaigns in it. Should the war in America drag out through

every other sort of militia. It is the first great revolution in the
affairs of mankind of which history has preserved any distinct and

another campaign, the American militia may become, in every

circumstantial account.

573

The Wealth of Nations
The fall of Carthage, and the consequent elevation of Rome, is
the second. All the varieties in the fortune of those two famous

the younger Asdrubal, expelled them almost entirely from that
country.

republics may very well be accounted for from the same cause.
From the end of the first to the beginning of the second

Annibal was ill supplied from home. The Roman militia, being
continually in the field, became, in the progress of the war, a well

Carthaginian war, the armies of Carthage were continually in the
field, and employed under three great generals, who succeeded

disciplined and well exercised standing army; and the superiority
of Annibal grew every day less and less. Asdrubal judged it neces-

one another in the command; Amilcar, his son-in-law Asdrubal,
and his son Annibal: first in chastising their own rebellious slaves,

sary to lead the whole, or almost the whole, of the standing army
which he commanded in Spain, to the assistance of his brother in

afterwards in subduing the revolted nations of Africa; and lastly,
in conquering the great kingdom of Spain. The army which

Italy. In this march, he is said to have been misled by his guides;
and in a country which he did not know, was surprised and at-

Annibal led from Spain into Italy must necessarily, in those different wars, have been gradually formed to the exact discipline of a

tacked, by another standing army, in every respect equal or superior to his own, and was entirely defeated.

standing army. The Romans, in the meantime, though they had
not been altogether at peace, yet they had not, during this period,

When Asdrubal had left Spain, the great Scipio found nothing
to oppose him but a militia inferior to his own. He conquered and

been engaged in any war of very great consequence; and their military discipline, it is generally said, was a good deal relaxed. The

subdued that militia, and, in the course of the war, his own militia
necessarily became a well disciplined and well exercised standing

Roman armies which Annibal encountered at Trebi, Thrasymenus,
and Cannae, were militia opposed to a standing army. This cir-

army. That standing army was afterwards carried to Africa, where
it found nothing but a militia to oppose it. In order to defend

cumstance, it is probable, contributed more than any other to
determine the fate of those battles.

Carthage, it became necessary to recal the standing army of
Annibal. The disheartened and frequently defeated African mili-

The standing army which Annibal left behind him in Spain had
the like superiority over the militia which the Romans sent to

tia joined it, and, at the battle of Zama, composed the greater part
of the troops of Annibal. The event of that day determined the

oppose it; and, in a few years, under the command of his brother,

fate of the two rival republics.

574

Adam Smith
From the end of the second Carthaginian war till the fall of the
Roman republic, the armies of Rome were in every respect stand-

to have always retained a good deal of the manners of their ancestors. The ancient Germans were, like the Scythians or Tartars, a

ing armies. The standing army of Macedon made some resistance
to their arms. In the height of their grandeur, it cost them two

nation of wandering shepherds, who went to war under the same
chiefs whom they were accustomed to follow in peace. ‘Their mi-

great wars, and three great battles, to subdue that little kingdom,
of which the conquest would probably have been still more diffi-

litia was exactly of the same kind with that of the Scythians or
Tartars, from whom, too, they were probably descended.

cult, had it not been for the cowardice of its last king. The militias
of all the civilized nations of the ancient world, of Greece, of Syria,

Many different causes contributed to relax the discipline of the
Roman armies. Its extreme severity was, perhaps, one of those

and of Egypt, made but a feeble resistance to the standing armies
of Rome. The militias of some barbarous nations defended them-

causes. In the days of their grandeur, when no enemy appeared
capable of opposing them, their heavy armour was laid aside as

selves much better. The Scythian or Tartar militia, which
Mithridates drew from the countries north of the Euxine and

unnecessarily burdensome, their laborious exercises were neglected,
as unnecessarily toilsome. Under the Roman emperors, besides,

Caspian seas, were the most formidable enemies whom the Romans had to encounter after the second Carthaginian war. The

the standing armies of Rome, those particularly which guarded
the German and Pannonian frontiers, became dangerous to their

Parthian and German militias, too, were always respectable, and
upon several occasions, gained very considerable advantages over

masters, against whom they used frequently to set up their own
generals. In order to render them less formidable, according to

the Roman armies. In general, however, and when the Roman
armies were well commanded, they appear to have been very much

some authors, Dioclesian, according to others, Constantine, first
withdrew them from the frontier, where they had always before

superior; and if the Romans did not pursue the final conquest
either of Parthia or Germany, it was probably because they judged

been encamped in great bodies, generally of two or three legions
each, and dispersed them in small bodies through the different

that it was not worth while to add those two barbarous countries
to an empire which was already too large. The ancient Parthians

provincial towns, from whence they were scarce ever removed,
but when it became necessary to repel an invasion. Small bodies

appear to have been a nation of Scythian or Tartar extraction, and

of soldiers, quartered in trading and manufacturing towns, and

575

The Wealth of Nations
seldom removed from those quarters, became themselves trades
men, artificers, and manufacturers. The civil came to predomi-

ued for some time to be of the same kind in their new settlements,
as it had been in their original country. It was a militia of shep-

nate over the military character; and the standing armies of Rome
gradually degenerated into a corrupt, neglected, and undisciplined

herds and husbandmen, which, in time of war, took the field under the command of the same chieftains whom it was accustomed

militia, incapable of resisting the attack of the German and Scythian
militias, which soon afterwards invaded the western empire. It

to obey in peace. It was, therefore, tolerably well exercised, and
tolerably well disciplined. As arts and industry advanced, how-

was only by hiring the militia of some of those nations to oppose
to that of others, that the emperors were for some time able to

ever, the authority of the chieftains gradually decayed, and the
great body of the people had less time to spare for military exer-

defend themselves. The fall of the western empire is the third great
revolution in the affairs of mankind, of which ancient history has

cises. Both the discipline and the exercise of the feudal militia,
therefore, went gradually to ruin, and standing armies were gradu-

preserved any distinct or circumstantial account. It was brought
about by the irresistible superiority which the militia of a barba-

ally introduced to supply the place of it. When the expedient of a
standing army, besides, had once been adopted by one civilized

rous has over that of a civilized nation; which the militia of a
nation of shepherds has over that of a nation of husbandmen,

nation, it became necessary that all its neighbours should follow
the example. They soon found that their safety depended upon

artificers, and manufacturers. The victories which have been gained
by militias have generally been, not over standing armies, but over

their doing so, and that their own militia was altogether incapable
of resisting the attack of such an army.

other militias, in exercise and discipline inferior to themselves.
Such were the victories which the Greek militia gained over that

The soldiers of a standing army, though they may never have
seen an enemy, yet have frequently appeared to possess all the cour-

of the Persian empire; and such, too, were those which, in later
times, the Swiss militia gained over that of the Austrians and

age of veteran troops, and, the very moment that they took the
field, to have been fit to face the hardiest and most experienced

Burgundians.
The military force of the German and Scythian nations, who

veterans. In 1756, when the Russian army marched into Poland,
the valour of the Russian soldiers did not appear inferior to that of

established themselves upon ruins of the western empire, contin-

the Prussians, at that time supposed to be the hardiest and most

576

Adam Smith
experienced veterans in Europe. The Russian empire, however,
had enjoyed a profound peace for near twenty years before, and

As it is only by means of a well regulated standing army, that a
civilized country can be defended, so it is only by means of it that a

could at that time have very few soldiers who had ever seen an
enemy. When the Spanish war broke out in 1739, England had

barbarous country can be suddenly and tolerably civilized. A standing army establishes, with an irresistible force, the law of the sover-

enjoyed a profound peace for about eight-and-twenty years. The
valour of her soldiers, however, far from being corrupted by that

eign through the remotest provinces of the empire, and maintains
some degree of regular government in countries which could not

long peace, was never more distinguished than in the attempt upon
Carthagena, the first unfortunate exploit of that unfortunate war.

otherwise admit of any. Whoever examines with attention, the improvements which Peter the Great introduced into the Russian

In a long peace, the generals, perhaps, may sometimes forget their
skill; but where a well regulated standing army has been kept up,

empire, will find that they almost all resolve themselves into the
establishment of a well regulated standing army. It is the instrument

the soldiers seem never to forget their valour.
When a civilized nation depends for its defence upon a militia,

which executes and maintains all his other regulations. That degree
of order and internal peace, which that empire has ever since en-

it is at all times exposed to be conquered by any barbarous nation
which happens to be in its neighbourhood. The frequent con-

joyed, is altogether owing to the influence of that army.
Men of republican principles have been jealous of a standing

quests of all the civilized countries in Asia by the Tartars, sufficiently demonstrates the natural superiority which the militia of a

army, as dangerous to liberty. It certainly is so, wherever the interest of the general, and that of the principal officers, are not neces-

barbarous has over that of a civilized nation. A well regulated standing army is superior to every militia. Such an army, as it can best

sarily connected with the support of the constitution of the state.
The standing army of Caesar destroyed the Roman republic. The

be maintained by an opulent and civilized nation, so it can alone
defend such a nation against the invasion of a poor and barbarous

standing army of Cromwell turned the long parliament out of
doors. But where the sovereign is himself the general, and the

neighbour. It is only by means of a standing army, therefore, that
the civilization of any country can be perpetuated, or even pre-

principal nobility and gentry of the country the chief officers of
the army; where the military force is placed under the command

served, for any considerable time.

of those who have the greatest interest in the support of the civil

577

The Wealth of Nations
authority, because they have themselves the greatest share of that
authority, a standing army can never be dangerous to liberty. On

The first duty of the sovereign, therefore, that of defending the
society from the violence and injustice of other independent societ-

the contrary, it may, in some cases, be favourable to liberty. The
security which it gives to the sovereign renders unnecessary that

ies, grows gradually more and more expensive, as the society advances in civilization. The military force of the society, which origi-

troublesome jealousy, which, in some modern republics, seems to
watch over the minutest actions, and to be at all times ready to

nally cost the sovereign no expense, either in time of peace, or in
time of war, must, in the progress of improvement, first be main-

disturb the peace of every citizen. Where the security of the magistrate, though supported by the principal people of the country,

tained by him in time of war, and afterwards even in time of peace.
The great change introduced into the art of war by the inven-

is endangered by every popular discontent; where a small tumult
is capable of bringing about in a few hours a great revolution, the

tion of fire-arms, has enhanced still further both the expense of
exercising and disciplining any particular number of soldiers in

whole authority of government must be employed to suppress and
punish every murmur and complaint against it. To a sovereign, on

time of peace, and that of employing them in time of war. Both
their arms and their ammunition are become more expensive. A

the contrary, who feels himself supported, not only by the natural
aristocracy of the country, but by a well regulated standing army,

musket is a more expensive machine than a javelin or a bow and
arrows; a cannon or a mortar, than a balista or a catapulta. The

the rudest, the most groundless, and the most licentious remonstrances, can give little disturbance. He can safely pardon or neglect

powder which is spent in a modern review is lost irrecoverably,
and occasions a very considerable expense. The javelins and ar-

them, and his consciousness of his own superiority naturally disposes him to do so. That degree of liberty which approaches to

rows which were thrown or shot in an ancient one, could easily be
picked up again, and were, besides, of very little value. The can-

licentiousness, can be tolerated only in countries where the sovereign is secured by a well regulated standing army. It is in such coun-

non and the mortar are not only much dearer, but much heavier
machines than the balista or catapulta; and require a greater ex-

tries only, that the public safety does not require that the sovereign
should be trusted with any discretionary power, for suppressing even

pense, not only to prepare them for the field, but to carry them to
it. As the superiority of the modern artillery, too, over that of the

the impertinent wantonness of this licentious liberty.

ancients, is very great; it has become much more difficult, and

578

Adam Smith
consequently much more expensive, to fortify a town, so as to
resist, even for a few weeks, the attack of that superior artillery. In

PART II

modern times, many different causes contribute to render the defence of the society more expensive. The unavoidable effects of

Of the Expense of Justice

the natural progress of improvement have, in this respect, been a
good deal enhanced by a great revolution in the art of war, to

THE SECOND DUTY of the sovereign, that of protecting, as far as
possible, every member of the society from the injustice or op-

which a mere accident, the invention of gunpowder, seems to have
given occasion.

pression of every other member of it, or the duty of establishing
an exact administration of justice, requires two very different de-

In modern war, the great expense of firearms gives an evident
advantage to the nation which can best afford that expense; and,

grees of expense in the different periods of society.
Among nations of hunters, as there is scarce any property, or at

consequently, to an opulent and civilized, over a poor and barbarous nation. In ancient times, the opulent and civilized found it

least none that exceeds the value of two or three days labour; so
there is seldom any established magistrate, or any regular admin-

difficult to defend themselves against the poor and barbarous nations. In modern times, the poor and barbarous find it difficult to

istration of justice. Men who have no property, can injure one
another only in their persons or reputations. But when one man

defend themselves against the opulent and civilized. The invention of fire-arms, an invention which at first sight appears to be so

kills, wounds, beats, or defames another, though he to whom the
injury is done suffers, he who does it receives no benefit. It is

pernicious, is certainly favourable, both to the permanency and to
the extension of civilization.

otherwise with the injuries to property. The benefit of the person
who does the injury is often equal to the loss of him who suffers it.
Envy, malice, or resentment, are the only passions which can
prompt one man to injure another in his person or reputation.
But the greater part of men are not very frequently under the
influence of those passions; and the very worst men are so only
occasionally. As their gratification, too, how agreeable soever it

579

The Wealth of Nations
may be to certain characters, is not attended with any real or permanent advantage, it is, in the greater part of men, commonly

Where there is no property, or at least none that exceeds the value
of two or three days labour, civil government is not so necessary.

restrained by prudential considerations. Men may live together in
society with some tolerable degree of security, though there is no

Civil government supposes a certain subordination. But as the
necessity of civil government gradually grows up with the acquisi-

civil magistrate to protect them from the injustice of those passions. But avarice and ambition in the rich, in the poor the hatred

tion of valuable property; so the principal causes, which naturally
introduce subordination, gradually grow up with the growth of

of labour and the love of present ease and enjoyment, are the passions which prompt to invade property; passions much more steady

that valuable property.
The causes or circumstances which naturally introduce subor-

in their operation, and much more universal in their influence.
Wherever there is a great property, there is great inequality. For

dination, or which naturally and antecedent to any civil institution, give some men some superiority over the greater part of their

one very rich man, there must be at least five hundred poor, and
the affluence of the few supposes the indigence of the many. The

brethren, seem to be four in number.
The first of those causes or circumstances, is the superiority of

affluence of the rich excites the indignation of the poor, who are
often both driven by want, and prompted by envy to invade his

personal qualifications, of strength, beauty, and agility of body; of
wisdom and virtue; of prudence, justice, fortitude, and modera-

possessions. It is only under the shelter of the civil magistrate, that
the owner of that valuable property, which is acquired by the labour

tion of mind. The qualifications of the body, unless supported by
those of the mind, can give little authority in any period of soci-

of many years, or perhaps of many successive generations, can
sleep a single night in security. He is at all times surrounded by

ety. He is a very strong man, who, by mere strength of body, can
force two weak ones to obey him. The qualifications of the mind

unknown enemies, whom, though he never provoked, he can never
appease, and from whose injustice he can be protected only by the

can alone give very great authority They are however, invisible
qualities; always disputable, and generally disputed. No society,

powerful arm of the civil magistrate, continually held up to chastise it. The acquisition of valuable and extensive property, there-

whether barbarous or civilized, has ever found it convenient to
settle the rules of precedency of rank and subordination, accord-

fore, necessarily requires the establishment of civil government.

ing to those invisible qualities; but according to something that is

580

Adam Smith
more plain and palpable.
The second of those causes or circumstances, is the superiority

his society does not afford him any manufactured produce any
trinkets or baubles of any kind, for which he can exchange that

of age. An old man, provided his age is not so far advanced as to
give suspicion of dotage, is everywhere more respected than a young

part of his rude produce which is over and above his own consumption. The thousand men whom he thus maintains, depend-

man of equal rank, fortune, and abilities. Among nations of hunters, such as the native tribes of North America, age is the sole

ing entirely upon him for their subsistence, must both obey his
orders in war, and submit to his jurisdiction in peace. He is neces-

foundation of rank and precedency. Among them, father is the
appellation of a superior; brother, of an equal; and son, of an infe-

sarily both their general and their judge, and his chieftainship is
the necessary effect of the superiority of his fortune. In an opulent

rior. In the most opulent and civilized nations, age regulates rank
among those who are in every other respect equal; and among

and civilized society, a man may possess a much greater fortune,
and yet not be able to command a dozen of people. Though the

whom, therefore, there is nothing else to regulate it. Among brothers and among sisters, the eldest always takes place; and in the

produce of his estate may be sufficient to maintain, and may, perhaps, actually maintain, more than a thousand people, yet, as those

succession of the paternal estate, every thing which cannot be divided, but must go entire to one person, such as a title of honour,

people pay for every thing which they get from him, as he gives
scarce any thing to any body but in exchange for an equivalent,

is in most cases given to the eldest. Age is a plain and palpable
quality, which admits of no dispute.

there is scarce anybody who considers himself as entirely dependent upon him, and his authority extends only over a few menial

The third of those causes or circumstances, is the superiority of
fortune. The authority of riches, however, though great in every

servants. The authority of fortune, however, is very great, even in
an opulent and civilized society. That it is much greater than that

age of society, is, perhaps, greatest in the rudest ages of society,
which admits of any considerable inequality of fortune. A Tartar

either of age or of personal qualities, has been the constant complaint of every period of society which admitted of any consider-

chief, the increase of whose flocks and herds is sufficient to maintain a thousand men, cannot well employ that increase in any

able inequality of fortune. The first period of society, that of hunters, admits of no such inequality. Universal poverty establishes

other way than in maintaining a thousand men. The rude state of

their universal equality; and the superiority, either of age or of

581

The Wealth of Nations
personal qualities, are the feeble, but the sole foundations of authority and subordination. There is, therefore, little or no author-

that his inferior should be set over his head; so men easily submit
to a family to whom they and their ancestors have always submit-

ity or subordination in this period of society. The second period
of society, that of shepherds, admits of very great inequalities of

ted; but are fired with indignation when another family, in whom
they had never acknowledged any such superiority, assumes a do-

fortune, and there is no period in which the superiority of fortune
gives so great authority to those who possess it. There is no period,

minion over them.
The distinction of birth, being subsequent to the inequality of

accordingly, in which authority and subordination are more perfectly established. The authority of an Arabian scherif is very great;

fortune, can have no place in nations of hunters, among whom all
men, being equal in fortune, must likewise be very nearly equal in

that of a Tartar khan altogether despotical.
The fourth of those causes or circumstances, is the superiority

birth. The son of a wise and brave man may, indeed, even among
them, be somewhat more respected than a man of equal merit,

of birth. Superiority of birth supposes an ancient superiority of
fortune in the family of the person who claims it. All families are

who has the misfortune to be the son of a fool or a coward. The
difference, however will not be very great; and there never was, I

equally ancient; and the ancestors of the prince, though they may
be better known, cannot well be more numerous than those of the

believe, a great family in the world, whose illustration was entirely
derived from the inheritance of wisdom and virtue.

beggar. Antiquity of family means everywhere the antiquity either
of wealth, or of that greatness which is commonly either founded

The distinction of birth not only may, but always does, take
place among nations of shepherds. Such nations are always strangers

upon wealth, or accompanied with it. Upstart greatness is everywhere less respected than ancient greatness. The hatred of usurp-

to every sort of luxury, and great wealth can scarce ever be dissipated among them by improvident profusion. There are no na-

ers, the love of the family of an ancient monarch, are in a great
measure founded upon the contempt which men naturally have

tions, accordingly, who abound more in families revered and
honoured on account of their descent from a long race of great

for the former, and upon their veneration for the latter. As a military officer submits, without reluctance, to the authority of a su-

and illustrious ancestors; because there are no nations among whom
wealth is likely to continue longer in the same families.

perior by whom he has always been commanded, but cannot bear

Birth and fortune are evidently the two circumstances which

582

Adam Smith
principally set one man above another. They are the two great
sources of personal distinction, and are, therefore, the principal

person complained of, than that of any other person would be.
His birth and fortune thus naturally procure him some sort of

causes which naturally establish authority and subordination
among men. Among nations of shepherds, both those causes op-

judicial authority.
It is in the age of shepherds, in the second period of society, that

erate with their full force. The great shepherd or herdsman, respected on account of his great wealth, and of the great number of

the inequality of fortune first begins to take place, and introduces
among men a degree of authority and subordination, which could

those who depend upon him for subsistence, and revered on account of the nobleness of his birth, and of the immemorial antiq-

not possibly exist before. It thereby introduces some degree of
that civil government which is indispensably necessary for its own

uity or his illustrious family, has a natural authority over all the
inferior shepherds or herdsmen of his horde or clan. He can com-

preservation; and it seems to do this naturally, and even independent of the consideration of that necessity. The consideration of

mand the united force of a greater number of people than any of
them. His military power is greater than that of any of them. In

that necessity comes, no doubt, afterwards, to contribute very much
to maintain and secure that authority and subordination. The rich,

time of war, they are all of them naturally disposed to muster
themselves under his banner, rather than under that of any other

in particular, are necessarily interested to support that order of
things, which can alone secure them in the possession of their

person; and his birth and fortune thus naturally procure to him
some sort of executive power. By commanding, too, the united

own advantages. Men of inferior wealth combine to defend those
of superior wealth in the possession of their property, in order that

force of a greater number of people than any of them, he is best
able to compel any one of them, who may have injured another,

men of superior wealth may combine to defend them in the possession of theirs. All the inferior shepherds and herdsmen feel,

to compensate the wrong. He is the person, therefore, to whom
all those who are too weak to defend themselves naturally look up

that the security of their own herds and flocks depends upon the
security of those of the great shepherd or herdsman; that the main-

for protection. It is to him that they naturally complain of the
injuries which they imagine have been done to them; and his in-

tenance of their lesser authority depends upon that of his greater
authority; and that upon their subordination to him depends his

terposition, in such cases, is more easily submitted to, even by the

power of keeping their inferiors in subordination to them. They

583

The Wealth of Nations
constitute a sort of little nobility, who feel themselves interested to
defend the property, and to support the authority, of their own

particular territory or district. Originally, both the sovereign and
the inferior chiefs used to exercise this jurisdiction in their own

little sovereign, in order that he may be able to defend their property, and to support their authority. Civil government, so far as it

persons. Afterwards, they universally found it convenient to delegate it to some substitute, bailiff, or judge. This substitute, how-

is instituted for the security of property, is, in reality, instituted for
the defence of the rich against the poor, or of those who have

ever, was still obliged to account to his principal or constituent for
the profits of the jurisdiction. Whoever reads the instructions (They

some property against those who have none at all.
The judicial authority of such a sovereign, however, far from

are to be found in Tyrol’s History of England) which were given to
the judges of the circuit in the time of Henry II will see clearly

being a cause of expense, was, for a long time, a source of revenue
to him. The persons who applied to him for justice were always

that those judges were a sort of itinerant factors, sent round the
country for the purpose of levying certain branches of the king’s

willing to pay for it, and a present never failed to accompany a
petition. After the authority of the sovereign, too, was thoroughly

revenue. In those days, the administration of justice not only afforded a certain revenue to the sovereign, but, to procure this rev-

established, the person found guilty, over and above the satisfaction which he was obliged to make to the party, was like-wise

enue, seems to have been one of the principal advantages which
he proposed to obtain by the administration of justice.

forced to pay an amercement to the sovereign. He had given
trouble, he had disturbed, he had broke the peace of his lord the

This scheme of making the administration of justice subservient to the purposes of revenue, could scarce fail to be productive

king, and for those offences an amercement was thought due. In
the Tartar governments of Asia, in the governments of Europe

of several very gross abuses. The person who applied for justice
with a large present in his hand, was likely to get something more

which were founded by the German and Scythian nations who
overturned the Roman empire, the administration of justice was a

than justice; while he who applied for it with a small one was
likely to get something less. Justice, too, might frequently be de-

considerable source of revenue, both to the sovereign, and to all
the lesser chiefs or lords who exercised under him any particular

layed, in order that this present might be repeated. The amercement, besides, of the person complained of, might frequently sug-

jurisdiction, either over some particular tribe or clan, or over some

gest a very strong reason for finding him in the wrong, even when

584

Adam Smith
he had not really been so. That such abuses were far from being
uncommon, the ancient history of every country in Europe bears

maintained in the same manner as any of his vassals or subjects,
by the increase of his own herds or flocks. Among those nations of

witness.
When the sovereign or chief exercises his judicial authority in

husbandmen, who are but just come out of the shepherd state,
and who are not much advanced beyond that state, such as the

his own person, how much soever he might abuse it, it must have
been scarce possible to get any redress; because there could seldom

Greek tribes appear to have been about the time of the Trojan war,
and our German and Scythian ancestors, when they first settled

be any body powerful enough to call him to account. When he
exercised it by a bailiff, indeed, redress might sometimes be had. If

upon the ruins of the western empire; the sovereign or chief is, in
the same manner, only the greatest landlord of the country, and is

it was for his own benefit only, that the bailiff had been guilty of
an act of injustice, the sovereign himself might not always be un-

maintained in the same manner as any other landlord, by a revenue derived from his own private estate, or from what, in mod-

willing to punish him, or to oblige him to repair the wrong. But if
it was for the benefit of his sovereign; if it was in order to make

ern Europe, was called the demesne of the crown. His subjects,
upon ordinary occasions, contribute nothing to his support, ex-

court to the person who appointed him, and who might prefer
him, that he had committed any act of oppression; redress would,

cept when, in order to protect them from the oppression of some
of their fellow-subjects, they stand in need of his authority. The

upon most occasions, be as impossible as if the sovereign had committed it himself. In all barbarous governments, accordingly, in all

presents which they make him upon such occasions constitute the
whole ordinary revenue, the whole of the emoluments which, ex-

those ancient governments of Europe in particular, which were
founded upon the ruins of the Roman empire, the administration

cept, perhaps, upon some very extraordinary emergencies, he derives from his dominion over them. When Agamemnon, in Homer,

of justice appears for a long time to have been extremely corrupt;
far from being quite equal and impartial, even under the best

offers to Achilles, for his friendship, the sovereignty of seven Greek
cities, the sole advantage which he mentions as likely to be derived

monarchs, and altogether profligate under the worst.
Among nations of shepherds, where the sovereign or chief is

from it was, that the people would honour him with presents. As
long as such presents, as long as the emoluments of justice, or

only the greatest shepherd or herdsman of the horde or clan, he is

what may be called the fees of court, constituted, in this manner,

585

The Wealth of Nations
the whole ordinary revenue which the sovereign derived from his
sovereignty, it could not well be expected, it could not even de-

the judges, which were supposed to compensate to them the loss
of whatever might have been their share of the ancient emolu-

cently be proposed, that he should give them up altogether. It
might, and it frequently was proposed, that he should regulate

ments of justice; as the taxes more than compensated to the sovereign the loss of his. Justice was then said to be administered gratis.

and ascertain them. But after they had been so regulated and ascertained, how to hinder a person who was all-powerful from ex-

Justice, however, never was in reality administered gratis in any
country. Lawyers and attorneys, at least, must always be paid by the

tending them beyond those regulations, was still very difficult,
not to say impossible. During the continuance of this state of things,

parties; and if they were not, they would perform their duty still
worse than they actually perform it. The fees annually paid to law-

therefore, the corruption of justice, naturally resulting from the
arbitrary and uncertain nature of those presents, scarce admitted

yers and attorneys, amount, in every court, to a much greater sum
than the salaries of the judges. The circumstance of those salaries

of any effectual remedy.
But when, from different causes, chiefly from the continually

being paid by the crown, can nowhere much diminish the necessary
expense of a law-suit. But it was not so much to diminish the ex-

increasing expense of defending the nation against the invasion of
other nations, the private estate of the sovereign had become alto-

pense, as to prevent the corruption of justice, that the judges were
prohibited from receiving my present or fee from the parties.

gether insufficient for defraying the expense of the sovereignty;
and when it had become necessary that the people should, for

The office of judge is in itself so very honourable, that men are
willing to accept of it, though accompanied with very small emolu-

their own security, contribute towards this expense by taxes of
different kinds; it seems to have been very commonly stipulated,

ments. The inferior office of justice of peace, though attended
with a good deal of trouble, and in most cases with no emolu-

that no present for the administration of justice should, under
any pretence, be accepted either by the sovereign, or by his bailiffs

ments at all, is an object of ambition to the greater part of our
country gentlemen. The salaries of all the different judges, high

and substitutes, the judges. Those presents, it seems to have been
supposed, could more easily be abolished altogether, than effectu-

and low, together with the whole expense of the administration
and execution of justice, even where it is not managed with very

ally regulated and ascertained. Fixed salaries were appointed to

good economy, makes, in any civilized country, but a very incon-

586

Adam Smith
siderable part of the whole expense of government.
The whole expense of justice, too, might easily be defrayed by

of a considerable number of judges, by proportioning the share of
each judge to the number of hours and days which he had em-

the fees of court; and, without exposing the administration of justice to any real hazard of corruption, the public revenue might

ployed in examining the process, either in the court, or in a committee, by order of the court, those fees might give some encour-

thus be entirely discharged from a certain, though perhaps but a
small incumbrance. It is difficult to regulate the fees of court ef-

agement to the diligence of each particular judge. Public services
are never better performed, than when their reward comes only in

fectually, where a person so powerful as the sovereign is to share in
them and to derive any considerable part of his revenue from them.

consequence of their being performed, and is proportioned to the
diligence employed in performing them. In the different parlia-

It is very easy, where the judge is the principal person who can
reap any benefit from them. The law can very easily oblige the

ments of France, the fees of court (called epices and vacations)
constitute the far greater part of the emoluments of the judges.

judge to respect the regulation though it might not always be able
to make the sovereign respect it. Where the fees of court are pre-

After all deductions are made, the neat salary paid by the crown to
a counsellor or judge in the parliament of Thoulouse, in rank and

cisely regulated and ascertained where they are paid all at once, at
a certain period of every process, into the hands of a cashier or

dignity the second parliament of the kingdom, amounts only to
150 livres, about £6:11s. sterling a-year. About seven years ago,

receiver, to be by him distributed in certain known proportions
among the different judges after the process is decided and not till

that sum was in the same place the ordinary yearly wages of a
common footman. The distribution of these epices, too, is ac-

it is decided; there seems to be no more danger of corruption than
when such fees are prohibited altogether. Those fees, without

cording to the diligence of the judges. A diligent judge gains a
comfortable, though moderate revenue, by his office; an idle one

occasioning any considerable increase in the expense of a law-suit,
might be rendered fully sufficient for defraying the whole expense

gets little more than his salary. Those parliaments are, perhaps, in
many respects, not very convenient courts of justice; but they have

of justice. But not being paid to the judges till the process was
determined, they might be some incitement to the diligence of

never been accused; they seem never even to have been suspected
of corruption.

the court in examining and deciding it. In courts which consisted

The fees of court seem originally to have been the principal

587

The Wealth of Nations
support of the different courts of justice in England. Each court
endeavoured to draw to itself as much business as it could, and

of conscience, first took upon it to enforce the specific performance of agreements. When the breach of contract consisted in

was, upon that account, willing to take cognizance of many suits
which were not originally intended to fall under its jurisdiction.

the non-payment of money, the damage sustained could be compensated in no other way than by ordering payment, which was

The court of king’s bench, instituted for the trial of criminal causes
only, took cognizance of civil suits; the plaintiff pretending that

equivalent to a specific performance of the agreement. In such
cases, therefore, the remedy of the courts of law was sufficient. It

the defendant, in not doing him justice, had been guilty of some
trespass or misdemeanour. The court of exchequer, instituted for

was not so in others. When the tenant sued his lord for having
unjustly outed him of his lease, the damages which he recovered

the levying of the king’s revenue, and for enforcing the payment
of such debts only as were due to the king, took cognizance of all

were by no means equivalent to the possession of the land. Such
causes, therefore, for some time, went all to the court of chancery,

other contract debts; the planitiff alleging that he could not pay
the king, because the defendant would not pay him. In conse-

to the no small loss of the courts of law. It was to draw back such
causes to themselves, that the courts of law are said to have in-

quence of such fictions, it came, in many cases, to depend altogether upon the parties, before what court they would choose to

vented the artificial and fictitious writ of ejectment, the most effectual remedy for an unjust outer or dispossession of land.

have their cause tried, and each court endeavoured, by superior
dispatch and impartiality, to draw to itself as many causes as it

A stamp-duty upon the law proceedings of each particular court,
to be levied by that court, and applied towards the maintenance

could. The present admirable constitution of the courts of justice
in England was, perhaps, originally, in a great measure, formed by

of the judges, and other officers belonging to it, might in the same
manner, afford a revenue sufficient for defraying the expense of

this emulation, which anciently took place between their respective judges: each judge endeavouring to give, in his own court, the

the administration of justice, without bringing any burden upon
the general revenue of the society. The judges, indeed, might in

speediest and most effectual remedy which the law would admit,
for every sort of injustice. Originally, the courts of law gave dam-

this case, be under the temptation of multiplying unnecessarily
the proceedings upon every cause, in order to increase, as much as

ages only for breach of contract. The court of chancery, as a court

possible, the produce of such a stamp-duty. It has been the cus-

588

Adam Smith
tom in modern Europe to regulate, upon most occasions, the payment of the attorneys and clerks of court according to the number

it an improper one for the maintenance of an institution which
ought to last for ever.

of pages which they had occasion to write; the court, however,
requiring that each page should contain so many lines, and each

The separation of the judicial from the executive power, seems
originally to have arisen from the increasing business of the soci-

line so many words. In order to increase their payment, the attorneys and clerks have contrived to multiply words beyond all ne-

ety, in consequence of its increasing improvement. The administration of justice became so laborious and so complicated a duty,

cessity, to the corruption of the law language of, I believe, every
court of justice in Europe. A like temptation might, perhaps, oc-

as to require the undivided attention of the person to whom it was
entrusted. The person entrusted with the executive power, not

casion a like corruption in the form of law proceedings.
But whether the administration of justice be so contrived as to

having leisure to attend to the decision of private causes himself, a
deputy was appointed to decide them in his stead. In the progress

defray its own expense, or whether the judges be maintained by
fixed salaries paid to them from some other fund, it does not seen

of the Roman greatness, the consul was too much occupied with
the political affairs of the state, to attend to the administration of

necessary that the person or persons entrusted with the executive
power should be charged with the management of that fund, or

justice. A praetor, therefore, was appointed to administer it in his
stead. In the progress of the European monarchies, which were

with the payment of those salaries. That fund might arise from
the rent of landed estates, the management of each estate being

founded upon the ruins of the Roman empire, the sovereigns and
the great lords came universally to consider the administration of

entrusted to the particular court which was to be maintained by
it. That fund might arise even from the interest of a sum of money,

justice as an office both too laborious and too ignoble for them to
execute in their own persons. They universally, therefore, discharged

the lending out of which might, in the same manner, be entrusted
to the court which was to be maintained by it. A part, though

themselves of it, by appointing a deputy, bailiff or judge.
When the judicial is united to the executive power, it is scarce

indeed but a small part of the salary of the judges of the court of
session in Scotland, arises from the interest of a sum of money.

possible that justice should not frequently be sacrificed to what is
vulgarly called politics. The persons entrusted with the great in-

The necessary instability of such a fund seems, however, to render

terests of the state may even without any corrupt views, some-

589

The Wealth of Nations
times imagine it necessary to sacrifice to those interests the rights
of a private man. But upon the impartial administration of justice

PART III

depends the liberty of every individual, the sense which he has of
his own security. In order to make every individual feel himself

Of the Expense of public Works and public Institutions

perfectly secure in the possession of every right which belongs to
him, it is not only necessary that the judicial should be separated

THE THIRD AND LAST DUTY of the sovereign or commonwealth, is
that of erecting and maintaining those public institutions and those

from the executive power, but that it should be rendered as much
as possible independent of that power. The judge should not be

public works, which though they may be in the highest degree advantageous to a great society, are, however, of such a nature, that the

liable to be removed from his office according to the caprice of
that power. The regular payment of his salary should not depend

profit could never repay the expense to any individual, or small
number of individuals; and which it, therefore, cannot be expected

upon the good will, or even upon the good economy of that power.

that any individual, or small number of individuals, should erect or
maintain. The performance of this duty requires, too, very different
degrees of expense in the different periods of society.
After the public institutions and public works necessary for the
defence of the society, and for the administration of justice, both
of which have already been mentioned, the other works and institutions of this kind are chiefly for facilitating the commerce of the
society, and those for promoting the instruction of the people.
The institutions for instruction are of two kinds: those for the
education of the youth, and those for the instruction of people of
all ages. The consideration of the manner in which the expense of
those different sorts of public works and institutions may be most
properly defrayed will divide this third part of the present chapter

590

Adam Smith
into three different articles.

tries, assigned to the executive power. The greater part of such
public works may easily be so managed, as to afford a particular

ARTICLE I. — Of the public Works and Institutions for facilitating the Commerce of the Society.

revenue, sufficient for defraying their own expense without bringing any burden upon the general revenue of the society.

And, first, of those which are necessary for facilitating Commerce in general.

A highway, a bridge, a navigable canal, for example, may, in
most cases, be both made add maintained by a small toll upon the

That the erection and maintenance of the public works which
facilitate the commerce of any country, such as good roads, bridges,

carriages which make use of them; a harbour, by a moderate portduty upon the tonnage of the shipping which load or unload in it.

navigable canals, harbours, etc. must require very different degrees of expense in the different periods of society, is evident with-

The coinage, another institution for facilitating commerce, in many
countries, not only defrays its own expense, but affords a small

out any proof. The expense of making and maintaining the public
roads of any country must evidently increase with the annual pro-

revenue or a seignorage to the sovereign. The post-office, another
institution for the same purpose, over and above defraying its own

duce of the land and labour of that country, or with the quantity
and weight of the goods which it becomes necessary to fetch and

expense, affords, in almost all countries, a very considerable revenue to the sovereign.

carry upon those roads. The strength of a bridge must be suited to
the number and weight of the carriages which are likely to pass

When the carriages which pass over a highway or a bridge, and
the lighters which sail upon a navigable canal, pay toll in propor-

over it. The depth and the supply of water for a navigable canal
must be proportioned to the number and tonnage of the lighters

tion to their weight or their tonnage, they pay for the maintenance of those public works exactly in proportion to the wear and

which are likely to carry goods upon it; the extent of a harbour, to
the number of the shipping which are likely to take shelter in it.

tear which they occasion of them. It seems scarce possible to invent a more equitable way of maintaining such works. This tax or

It does not seem necessary that the expense of those public works
should be defrayed from that public revenue, as it is commonly

toll, too, though it is advanced by the carrier, is finally paid by the
consumer, to whom it must always be charged in the price of the

called, of which the collection and application are in most coun-

goods. As the expense of carriage, however, is very much reduced

591

The Wealth of Nations
by means of such public works, the goods, notwithstanding the
toll, come cheaper to the consumer than they could otherwise

cannot be made through a desert country, where there is little or
no commerce, or merely because it happens to lead to the country

have done, their price not being so much raised by the toll, as it is
lowered by the cheapness of the carriage. The person who finally

villa of the intendant of the province, or to that of some great
lord, to whom the intendant finds it convenient to make his court.

pays this tax, therefore, gains by the application more than he
loses by the payment of it. His payment is exactly in proportion to

A great bridge cannot be thrown over a river at a place where
nobody passes, or merely to embellish the view from the windows

his gain. It is, in reality, no more than a part of that gain which he
is obliged to give up, in order to get the rest. It seems impossible

of a neighbouring palace; things which sometimes happen in countries, where works of this kind are carried on by any other revenue

to imagine a more equitable method of raising a tax.
When the toll upon carriages of luxury, upon coaches, post-

than that which they themselves are capable of affording.
In several different parts of Europe, the toll or lock-duty upon a

chaises, etc. is made somewhat higher in proportion to their weight,
than upon carriages of necessary use, such as carts, waggons, etc.

canal is the property of private persons, whose private interest
obliges them to keep up the canal. If it is not kept in tolerable

the indolence and vanity of the rich is made to contribute, in a
very easy manner, to the relief of the poor, by rendering cheaper

order, the navigation necessarily ceases altogether, and, along with
it, the whole profit which they can make by the tolls. If those tolls

the transportation of heavy goods to all the different parts of the
country.

were put under the management of commissioners, who had themselves no interest in them, they might be less attentive to the main-

When high-roads, bridges, canals, etc. are in this manner made
and supported by the commerce which is carried on by means of

tenance of the works which produced them. The canal of
Languedoc cost the king of France and the province upwards of

them, they can be made only where that commerce requires them,
and, consequently, where it is proper to make them. Their ex-

thirteen millions of livres, which (at twenty-eight livres the mark
of silver, the value of French money in the end of the last century)

pense, too, their grandeur and magnificence, must be suited to
what that commerce can afford to pay. They must be made, con-

amounted to upwards of nine hundred thousand pounds sterling.
When that great work was finished, the most likely method, it

sequently, as it is proper to make them. A magnificent high-road

was found, of keeping it in constant repair, was to make a present

592

Adam Smith
of the tolls to Riquet, the engineer who planned and conducted
the work. Those tolls constitute, at present, a very large estate to

observed, is not of very long standing. We should not wonder,
therefore, if it has not yet been brought to that degree of perfec-

the different branches of the family of that gentleman, who have,
therefore, a great interest to keep the work in constant repair. But

tion of which it seems capable. If mean and improper persons are
frequently appointed trustees; and if proper courts of inspection

had those tolls been put under the management of commissioners, who had no such interest, they might perhaps, have been dis-

and account have not yet been established for controlling their
conduct, and for reducing the tolls to what is barely sufficient for

sipated in ornamental and unnecessary expenses, while the most
essential parts of the works were allowed to go to ruin.

executing the work to be done by them; the recency of the institution both accounts and apologizes for those defects, of which, by

The tolls for the maintenance of a highroad cannot, with any
safety, be made the property of private persons. A high-road, though

the wisdom of parliament, the greater part may, in due time, be
gradually remedied.

entirely neglected, does not become altogether impassable, though
a canal does. The proprietors of the tolls upon a high-road, there-

The money levied at the different turnpikes in Great Britain, is
supposed to exceed so much what is necessary for repairing the

fore, might neglect altogether the repair of the road, and yet continue to levy very nearly the same tolls. It is proper, therefore, that

roads, that the savings which, with proper economy, might be
made from it, have been considered, even by some ministers, as a

the tolls for the maintenance of such a work should be put under
the management of commissioners or trustees.

very great resource, which might, at some time or another, be
applied to the exigencies of the state. Government, it has been

In Great Britain, the abuses which the trustees have committed
in the management of those tolls, have, in many cases, been very

said, by taking the management of the turnpikes into its own hands,
and by employing the soldiers, who would work for a very small

justly complained of. At many turnpikes, it has been said, the
money levied is more than double of what is necessary for execut-

addition to their pay, could keep the roads in good order, at a
much less expense than it can be done by trustees, who have no

ing, in the completest manner, the work, which is often executed
in a very slovenly manner, and sometimes not executed at all. The

other workmen to employ, but such as derive their whole subsistence from their wages. A great revenue, half a million, perhaps

system of repairing the high-roads by tolls of this kind, it must be

{Since publishing the two first editions of this book, I have got

593

The Wealth of Nations
good reasons to believe that all the turnpike tolls levied in Great
Britain do not produce a neat revenue that amounts to half a mil-

lions, if they were tripled {I have now good reason to believe that
all these conjectural sums are by much too large.}. This great rev-

lion; a sum which, under the management of government, would
not be sufficient to keep, in repair five of the principal roads in the

enue, too, might be levied without the appointment of a single new
officer to collect and receive it. But the turnpike tolls, being con-

kingdom}, it has been pretended, might in this manner be gained,
without laying any new burden upon the people; and the turn-

tinually augmented in this manner, instead of facilitating the inland
commerce of the country, as at present, would soon become a very

pike roads might be made to contribute to the general expense of
the state, in the same manner as the post-office does at present.

great incumbrance upon it. The expense of transporting all heavy
goods from one part of the country to another, would soon be so

That a considerable revenue might be gained in this manner, I
have no doubt, though probably not near so much as the projec-

much increased, the market for all such goods, consequently, would
soon be so much narrowed, that their production would be in a

tors of this plan have supposed. The plan itself, however, seems
liable to several very important objections.

great measure discouraged, and the most important branches of the
domestic industry of the country annihilated altogether.

First, If the tolls which are levied at the turnpikes should ever be
considered as one of the resources for supplying the exigencies of

Secondly, A tax upon carriages, in proportion to their weight,
though a very equal tax when applied to the sole purpose of re-

the state, they would certainly be augmented as those exigencies
were supposed to require. According to the policy of Great Brit-

pairing the roads, is a very unequal one when applied to any other
purpose, or to supply the common exigencies of the state. When

ain, therefore, they would probably he augmented very fast. The
facility with which a great revenue could be drawn from them,

it is applied to the sole purpose above mentioned, each carriage is
supposed to pay exactly for the wear and tear which that carriage

would probably encourage administration to recur very frequently
te this resource. Though it may, perhaps, be more than doubtful

occasions of the roads. But when it is applied to any other purpose, each carriage is supposed to pay for more than that wear and

whether half a million could by any economy be saved out of the
present tolls, it can scarcely be doubted, but that a million might

tear, and contributes to the supply of some other exigency of the
state. But as the turnpike toll raises the price of goods in propor-

be saved out of them, if they were doubled; and perhaps two mil-

tion to their weight and not to their value, it is chiefly paid by the

594

Adam Smith
consumers of coarse and bulky, not by those of precious and light
commodities. Whatever exigency of the state, therefore, this tax

By the ancient law of France, as well as by that of most other
parts of Europe, the labour of the country people was under the

might be intended to supply, that exigency would be chiefly supplied at the expense of the poor, not of the rich; at the expense of

direction of a local or provincial magistracy, which had no immediate dependency upon the king’s council. But, by the present

those who are least able to supply it, not of those who are most
able.

practice, both the labour of the country people, and whatever other
fund the king may choose to assign for the reparation of the high-

Thirdly, If government should at any time neglect the reparation of the high-roads, it would be still more difficult, than it is at

roads in any particular province or generality, are entirely under
the management of the intendant; an officer who is appointed

present, to compel the proper application of any part of the turnpike tolls. A large revenue might thus be levied upon the people,

and removed by the king’s council who receives his orders from it,
and is in constant correspondence with it. In the progress of des-

without any part of it being applied to the only purpose to which
a revenue levied in this manner ought ever to be applied. If the

potism, the authority of the executive power gradually absorbs
that of every other power in the state, and assumes to itself the

meanness and poverty of the trustees of turnpike roads render it
sometimes difficult, at present, to oblige them to repair their wrong;

management of every branch of revenue which is destined for any
public purpose. In France, however, the great post-roads, the roads

their wealth and greatness would render it ten times more so in
the case which is here supposed.

which make the communication between the principal towns of
the kingdom, are in general kept in good order; and, in some

In France, the funds destined for the reparation of the highroads are under the immediate direction of the executive power.

provinces, are even a good deal superior to the greater part of the
turnpike roads of England. But what we call the cross roads, that

Those funds consist, partly in a certain number of days labour,
which the country people are in most parts of Europe obliged to

is, the far greater part of the roads in the country, are entirely
neglected, and are in many places absolutely impassable for any

give to the reparation of the highways; and partly in such a portion of the general revenue of the state as the king chooses to spare

heavy carriage. In some places it is even dangerous to travel on
horseback, and mules are the only conveyance which can safely be

from his other expenses.

trusted. The proud minister of an ostentatious court, may fre-

595

The Wealth of Nations
quently take pleasure in executing a work of splendour and magnificence, such as a great highway, which is frequently seen by the

works, however, which have been transmitted to Europe, have generally been drawn up by weak and wondering travellers; frequently

principal nobility, whose applauses not only flatter his vanity, but
even contribute to support his interest at court. But to execute a

by stupid and lying missionaries. If they had been examined by
more intelligent eyes, and if the accounts of them had been re-

great number of little works, in which nothing that can be done
can make any great appearance, or excite the smallest degree of

ported by more faithful witnesses, they would not, perhaps, appear to be so wonderful. The account which Bernier gives of some

admiration in any traveller, and which, in short, have nothing to
recommend them but their extreme utility, is a business which

works of this kind in Indostan, falls very short of what had been
reported of them by other travellers, more disposed to the marvel-

appears, in every respect, too mean and paltry to merit the attention of so great a magistrate. Under such an administration there-

lous than he was. It may too, perhaps, be in those countries, as it
is in France, where the great roads, the great communications,

fore, such works are almost always entirely neglected.
In China, and in several other governments of Asia, the execu-

which are likely to be the subjects of conversation at the court and
in the capital, are attended to, and all the rest neglected. In China,

tive power charges itself both with the reparation of the highroads, and with the maintenance of the navigable canals. In the

besides, in Indostan, and in several other governments of Asia, the
revenue of the sovereign arises almost altogether from a land tax

instructions which are given to the governor of each province,
those objects, it is said, are constantly recommended to him, and

or land rent, which rises or falls with the rise and fall of the annual
produce of the land. The great interest of the sovereign, therefore,

the judgment which the court forms of his conduct is very much
regulated by the attention which he appears to have paid to this

his revenue, is in such countries necessarily and immediately connected with the cultivation of the land, with the greatness of its

part of his instructions. This branch of public police, accordingly,
is said to be very much attended to in all those countries, but

produce, and with the value of its produce. But in order to render
that produce both as great and as valuable as possible, it is neces-

particularly in China, where the high-roads, and still more the
navigable canals, it is pretended, exceed very much every thing of

sary to procure to it as extensive a market as possible, and consequently to establish the freest, the easiest, and the least expensive

the same kind which is known in Europe. The accounts of those

communication between all the different parts of the country;

596

Adam Smith
which can be done only by means of the best roads and the best
navigable canals. But the revenue of the sovereign does not, in any

there any probability that they would be so well lighted and paved
as they are at present, or even at so small an expense? The expense,

part of Europe, arise chiefly from a land tax or land rent. In all the
great kingdoms of Europe, perhaps, the greater part of it may

besides, instead of being raised by a local tax upon the inhabitants
of each particular street, parish, or district in London, would, in

ultimately depend upon the produce of the land: but that dependency is neither so immediate nor so evident. In Europe, there-

this case, be defrayed out of the general revenue of the state, and
would consequently be raised by a tax upon all the inhabitants of

fore, the sovereign does not feel himself so directly called upon to
promote the increase, both in quantity and value of the produce

the kingdom, of whom the greater part derive no sort of benefit
from the lighting and paving of the streets of London.

of the land, or, by maintaining good roads and canals, to provide
the most extensive market for that produce. Though it should be

The abuses which sometimes creep into the local and provincial
administration of a local and provincial revenue, how enormous

true, therefore, what I apprehend is not a little doubtful, that in
some parts of Asia this department of the public police is very

soever they may appear, are in reality, however, almost always very
trifling in comparison of those which commonly take place in the

properly managed by the executive power, there is not the least
probability that, during the present state of things, it could be

administration and expenditure of the revenue of a great empire.
They are, besides, much more easily corrected. Under the local or

tolerably managed by that power in any part of Europe.
Even those public works, which are of such a nature that they

provincial administration of the justices of the peace in Great Britain, the six days labour which the country people are obliged to

cannot afford any revenue for maintaining themselves, but of which
the conveniency is nearly confined to some particular place or

give to the reparation of the highways, is not always, perhaps, very
judiciously applied, but it is scarce ever exacted with any circum-

district, are always better maintained by a local or provincial revenue, under the management of a local and provincial administra-

stance of cruelty or oppression. In France, under the administration of the intendants, the application is not always more judi-

tion, than by the general revenue of the state, of which the executive power must always have the management. Were the streets of

cious, and the exaction is frequently the most cruel and oppressive. Such corvees, as they are called, make one of the principal

London to be lighted and paved at the expense of the treasury, is

instruments of tyranny by which those officers chastise any parish

597

The Wealth of Nations
or communeaute, which has had the misfortune to fall under their
displeasure.
Of the public Works and Institution which are necessary for
facilitating particular Branches of Commerce.

strangers to possess any fortified place within their territory, it
may be necessary to maintain some ambassador, minister, or consul, who may both decide, according to their own customs, the
differences arising among his own countrymen, and, in their disputes with the natives, may by means of his public character, interfere with more authority and afford them a more powerful pro-

The object of the public works and institutions above mentioned,
is to facilitate commerce in general. But in order to facilitate some

tection than they could expect from any private man. The interests of commerce have frequently made it necessary to maintain

particular branches of it, particular institutions are necessary, which
again require a particular and extraordinary expense.

ministers in foreign countries, where the purposes either of war or
alliance would not have required any. The commerce of the Tur-

Some particular branches of commerce which are carried on
with barbarous and uncivilized nations, require extraordinary pro-

key company first occasioned the establishment of an ordinary
ambassador at Constantinople. The first English embassies to

tection. An ordinary store or counting-house could give little security to the goods of the merchants who trade to the western

Russia arose altogether from commercial interests. The constant
interference with those interests, necessarily occasioned between

coast of Africa. To defend them from the barbarous natives, it is
necessary that the place where they are deposited should be in

the subjects of the different states of Europe, has probably introduced the custom of keeping, in all neighbouring countries, am-

some measure fortified. The disorders in the government of
Indostan have been supposed to render a like precaution neces-

bassadors or ministers constantly resident, even in the time of peace.
This custom, unknown to ancient times, seems not to be older

sary, even among that mild and gentle people; and it was under
pretence of securing their persons and property from violence,

than the end of the fifteenth, or beginning of the sixteenth century; that is, than the time when commerce first began to extend

that both the English and French East India companies were allowed to erect the first forts which they possessed in that country.

itself to the greater part of the nations of Europe, and when they
first began to attend to its interests.

Among other nations, whose vigorous government will suffer no

It seems not unreasonable, that the extraordinary expense which

598

Adam Smith
the protection of any particular branch of commerce may occasion, should be defrayed by a moderate tax upon that particular

ers, nations have not always acted consistently; and in the greater
part of the commercial states of Europe, particular companies of

branch; by a moderate fine, for example, to be paid by the traders
when they first enter into it; or, what is more equal, by a particular

merchants have had the address to persuade the legislature to entrust to them the performance of this part of the duty of the sov-

duty of so much per cent. upon the goods which they either import into, or export out of, the particular countries with which it

ereign, together with all the powers which are necessarily connected with it.

is carried on. The protection of trade, in general, from pirates and
freebooters, is said to have given occasion to the first institution of

These companies, though they may, perhaps, have been useful
for the first introduction of some branches of commerce, by mak-

the duties of customs. But, if it was thought reasonable to lay a
general tax upon trade, in order to defray the expense of protect-

ing, at their own expense, an experiment which the state might
not think it prudent to make, have in the long-run proved, uni-

ing trade in general, it should seem equally reasonable to lay a
particular tax upon a particular branch of trade, in order to defray

versally, either burdensome or useless, and have either mismanaged or confined the trade.

the extraordinary expense of protecting that branch.
The protection of trade, in general, has always been considered

When those companies do not trade upon a joint stock, but are
obliged to admit any person, properly qualified, upon paying a

as essential to the defence of the commonwealth, and, upon that
account, a necessary part of the duty of the executive power. The

certain fine, and agreeing to submit to the regulations of the company, each member trading upon his own stock, and at his own

collection and application of the general duties of customs, therefore, have always been left to that power. But the protection of

risk, they are called regulated companies. When they trade upon a
joint stock, each member sharing in the common profit or loss, in

any particular branch of trade is a part of the general protection of
trade; a part, therefore, of the duty of that power; and if nations

proportion to his share in this stock, they are called joint-stock
companies. Such companies, whether regulated or joint-stock,

always acted consistently, the particular duties levied for the purposes of such particular protection, should always have been left

sometimes have, and sometimes have not, exclusive privileges.
Regulated companies resemble, in every respect, the corpora-

equally to its disposal. But in this respect, as well as in many oth-

tion of trades, so common in the cities and towns of all the differ-

599

The Wealth of Nations
ent countries of Europe; and are a sort of enlarged monopolies of
the same kind. As no inhabitant of a town can exercise an incor-

The regulated companies for foreign commerce which at present
subsist in Great Britain, are the ancient merchant-adventurers com-

porated trade, without first obtaining his freedom in the incorporation, so, in most cases, no subject of the state can lawfully carry

pany, now commonly called the Hamburgh company, the Russia
company, the Eastland company, the Turkey company, and the

on any branch of foreign trade, for which a regulated company is
established, without first becoming a member of that company.

African company.
The terms of admission into the Hamburgh company are now

The monopoly is more or less strict, according as the terms of
admission are more or less difficult, and according as the directors

said to be quite easy; and the directors either have it not in their
power to subject the trade to any troublesome restraint or regula-

of the company have more or less authority, or have it more or less
in their power to manage in such a manner as to confine the greater

tions, or, at least, have not of late exercised that power. It has not
always been so. About the middle of the last century, the fine for

part of the trade to themselves and their particular friends. In the
most ancient regulated companies, the privileges of apprentice-

admission was fifty, and at one time one hundred pounds, and the
conduct of the company was said to be extremely oppressive. In

ship were the same as in other corporations, and entitled the person who had served his time to a member of the company, to

1643, in 1645, and in 1661, the clothiers and free traders of the
west of England complained of them to parliament, as of mo-

become himself a member, either without paying any fine, or upon
paying a much smaller one than what was exacted of other people.

nopolists, who confined the trade, and oppressed the manufactures of the country. Though those complaints produced no act of

The usual corporation spirit, wherever the law does not restrain it,
prevails in all regulated companies. When they have been allowed

parliament, they had probably intimidated the company so far, as
to oblige them to reform their conduct. Since that time, at least,

to act according to their natural genius, they have always, in order
to confine the competition to as small a number of persons as

there have been no complaints against them. By the 10th and
11th of William III. c.6, the fine for admission into the Russia

possible, endeavoured to subject the trade to many burdensome
regulations. When the law has restrained them from doing this,

company was reduced to five pounds; and by the 25th of Charles
II. c.7, that for admission into the Eastland company to forty

they have become altogether useless and insignificant.

shillings; while, at the same time, Sweden, Denmark, and Nor-

600

Adam Smith
way, all the countries on the north side of the Baltic, were exempted from their exclusive charter. The conduct of those com-

and not free of the city, could be admitted a member; another
restriction which, joined to the foregoing, necessarily excluded all

panies had probably given occasion to those two acts of parliament. Before that time, Sir Josiah Child had represented both

but the freemen of London. As the time for the loading and sailing of those general ships depended altogether upon the directors,

these and the Hamburgh company as extremely oppressive, and
imputed to their bad management the low state of the trade, which

they could easily fill them with their own goods, and those of
their particular friends, to the exclusion of others, who, they might

we at that time carried on to the countries comprehended within
their respective charters. But though such companies may not, in

pretend, had made their proposals too late. In this state of things,
therefore, this company was, in every respect, a strict and oppres-

the present times, be very oppressive, they are certainly altogether
useless. To be merely useless, indeed, is perhaps, the highest eu-

sive monopoly. Those abuses gave occasion to the act of the 26th
of George II. c. 18, reducing the fine for admission to twenty

logy which can ever justly be bestowed upon a regulated company; and all the three companies above mentioned seem, in their

pounds for all persons, without any distinction of ages, or any
restriction, either to mere merchants, or to the freemen of Lon-

present state, to deserve this eulogy.
The fine for admission into the Turkey company was formerly

don; and granting to all such persons the liberty of exporting,
from all the ports of Great Britain, to any port in Turkey, all Brit-

twenty-five pounds for all persons under twenty-six years of age,
and fifty pounds for all persons above that age. Nobody but mere

ish goods, of which the exportation was not prohibited, upon paying both the general duties of customs, and the particular duties

merchants could be admitted; a restriction which excluded all shopkeepers and retailers. By a bye-law, no British manufactures could

assessed for defraying the necessary expenses of the company; and
submitting, at the same time, to the lawful authority of the British

be exported to Turkey but in the general ships of the company;
and as those ships sailed always from the port of London, this

ambassador and consuls resident in Turkey, and to the bye-laws of
the company duly enacted. To prevent any oppression by those

restriction confined the trade to that expensive port, and the traders to those who lived in London and in its neighbourhood. By

bye-laws, it was by the same act ordained, that if any seven members of the company conceived themselves aggrieved by any bye-

another bye-law, no person living within twenty miles of London,

law which should be enacted after the passing of this act, they

601

The Wealth of Nations
might appeal to the board of trade and plantations (to the authority of which a committee of the privy council has now succeeded),

sufficient to discourage any man from entering into the Turkey
trade, with an intention to continue in it, may be enough to dis-

provided such appeal was brought within twelve months after the
bye-law was enacted; and that, if any seven members conceived

courage a speculative merchant from hazarding a single adventure
in it. In all trades, the regular established traders, even though not

themselves aggrieved by any bye-law which had been enacted before the passing of this act, they might bring a like appeal, pro-

incorporated, naturally combine to raise profits, which are noway
so likely to be kept, at all times, down to their proper level, as by

vided it was within twelve months after the day on which this act
was to take place. The experience of one year, however, may not

the occasional competition of speculative adventurers. The Turkey trade, though in some measure laid open by this act of parlia-

always be sufficient to discover to all the members of a great company the pernicious tendency of a particular bye-law; and if sev-

ment, is still considered by many people as very far from being
altogether free. The Turkey company contribute to maintain an

eral of them should afterwards discover it, neither the board of
trade, nor the committee of council, can afford them any redress.

ambassador and two or three consuls, who, like other public ministers, ought to be maintained altogether by the state, and the

The object, besides, of the greater part of the bye-laws of all regulated companies, as well as of all other corporations, is not so much

trade laid open to all his majesty’s subjects. The different taxes
levied by the company, for this and other corporation purposes,

to oppress those who are already members, as to discourage others
from becoming so; which may be done, not only by a high fine,

might afford a revenue much more than sufficient to enable a
state to maintain such ministers.

but by many other contrivances. The constant view of such companies is always to raise the rate of their own profit as high as they

Regulated companies, it was observed by Sir Josiah Child, though
they had frequently supported public ministers, had never main-

can; to keep the market, both for the goods which they export,
and for those which they import, as much understocked as they

tained any forts or garrisons in the countries to which they traded;
whereas joint-stock companies frequently had. And, in reality, the

can; which can be done only by restraining the competition, or by
discouraging new adventurers from entering into the trade. A fine,

former seem to be much more unfit for this sort of service than
the latter. First, the directors of a regulated company have no par-

even of twenty pounds, besides, though it may not, perhaps, be

ticular interest in the prosperity of the general trade of the com-

602

Adam Smith
pany, for the sake of which such forts and garrisons are maintained. The decay of that general trade may even frequently con-

such forts and garrisons, they can seldom have the same ability to
render that attention effectual. The maintenance of a public min-

tribute to the advantage of their own private trade; as, by diminishing the number of their competitors, it may enable them both

ister, requiring scarce any attention, and but a moderate and limited expense, is a business much more suitable both to the temper

to buy cheaper, and to sell dearer. The directors of a joint-stock
company, on the contrary, having only their share in the profits

and abilities of a regulated company.
Long after the time of Sir Josiah Child, however, in 1750, a

which are made upon the common stock committed to their management, have no private trade of their own, of which the interest

regulated company was established, the present company of merchants trading to Africa; which was expressly charged at first with

can be separated from that of the general trade of the company.
Their private interest is connected with the prosperity of the gen-

the maintenance of all the British forts and garrisons that lie between Cape Blanc and the Cape of Good Hope, and afterwards

eral trade of the company, and with the maintenance of the forts
and garrisons which are necessary for its defence. They are more

with that of those only which lie between Cape Rouge and the
Cape of Good Hope. The act which establishes this company (the

likely, therefore, to have that continual and careful attention which
that maintenance necessarily requires. Secondly, The directors of

23rd of George II. c.51 ), seems to have had two distinct objects
in view; first, to restrain effectually the oppressive and monopoliz-

a joint-stock company have always the management of a large
capital, the joint stock of the company, a part of which they may

ing spirit which is natural to the directors of a regulated company;
and, secondly, to force them, as much as possible, to give an atten-

frequently employ, with propriety, in building, repairing, and
maintaining such necessary forts and garrisons. But the directors

tion, which is not natural to them, towards the maintenance of
forts and garrisons.

of a regulated company, having the management of no common
capital, have no other fund to employ in this way, but the casual

For the first of these purposes, the fine for admission is limited
to forty shillings. The company is prohibited from trading in their

revenue arising from the admission fines, and from the corporation duties imposed upon the trade of the company. Though they

corporate capacity, or upon a joint stock; from borrowing money
upon common seal, or from laying any restraints upon the trade,

had the same interest, therefore, to attend to the maintenance of

which may be carried on freely from all places, and by all persons

603

The Wealth of Nations
being British subjects, and paying the fine. The government is in
a committee of nine persons, who meet at London, but who are

Senegal, with all its dependencies, had been invested in the company of merchants trading to Africa, yet, in the year following (by

chosen annually by the freemen of the company at London, Bristol,
and Liverpool; three from each place. No committeeman can be

the 5th of George III. c.44), not only Senegal and its dependencies, but the whole coast, from the port of Sallee, in South Bar-

continued in office for more than three years together. Any committee-man might be removed by the board of trade and planta-

bary, to Cape Rouge, was exempted from the jurisdiction of that
company, was vested in the crown, and the trade to it declared free

tions, now by a committee of council, after being heard in his own
defence. The committee are forbid to export negroes from Africa,

to all his majesty’s subjects. The company had been suspected of
restraining the trade and of establishing some sort of improper

or to import any African goods into Great Britain. But as they are
charged with the maintenance of forts and garrisons, they may,

monopoly. It is not, however, very easy to conceive how, under
the regulations of the 23d George II. they could do so. In the

for that purpose export from Great Britain to Africa goods and
stores of different kinds. Out of the moneys which they shall re-

printed debates of the house of commons, not always the most
authentic records of truth, I observe, however, that they have been

ceive from the company, they are allowed a sum, not exceeding
eight hundred pounds, for the salaries of their clerks and agents at

accused of this. The members of the committee of nine being all
merchants, and the governors and factors in their different forts

London, Bristol, and Liverpool, the house-rent of their offices at
London, and all other expenses of management, commission, and

and settlements being all dependent upon them, it is not unlikely
that the latter might have given peculiar attention to the consign-

agency, in England. What remains of this sum, after defraying
these different expenses, they may divide among themselves, as

ments and commissions of the former, which would establish a
real monopoly.

compensation for their trouble, in what manner they think proper.
By this constitution, it might have been expected, that the spirit

For the second of these purposes, the maintenance of the forts
and garrisons, an annual sum has been allotted to them by parlia-

of monopoly would have been effectually restrained, and the first
of these purposes sufficiently answered. It would seem, however,

ment, generally about £13,000. For the proper application of this
sum, the committee is obliged to account annually to the cursitor

that it had not. Though by the 4th of George III. c.20, the fort of

baron of exchequer; which account is afterwards to be laid before

604

Adam Smith
parliament. But parliament, which gives so little attention to the
application of millions, is not likely to give much to that of £13,000

an extraordinary sum of money. These bricks and stones, too, which
had thus been sent upon so long a voyage, were said to have been

a-year; and the cursitor baron of exchequer, from his profession
and education, is not likely to be profoundly skilled in the proper

of so bad a quality, that it was necessary to rebuild, from the foundation, the walls which had been repaired with them. The forts

expense of forts and garrisons. The captains of his majesty’s navy,
indeed, or any other commissioned officers, appointed by the board

and garrisons which lie north of Cape Rouge, are not only maintained at the expense of the state, but are under the immediate

of admiralty, may inquire into the condition of the forts and garrisons, and report their observations to that board. But that board

government of the executive power; and why those which lie south
of that cape, and which, too, are, in part at least, maintained at

seems to have no direct jurisdiction over the committee, nor any
authority to correct those whose conduct it may thus inquire into;

the expense of the state, should be under a different government,
it seems not very easy even to imagine a good reason. The protec-

and the captains of his majesty’s navy, besides, are not supposed to
be always deeply learned in the science of fortification. Removal

tion of the Mediterranean trade was the original purpose or pretence of the garrisons of Gibraltar and Minorca; and the mainte-

from an office, which can be enjoyed only for the term of three
years, and of which the lawful emoluments, even during that term,

nance and government of those garrisons have always been, very
properly, committed, not to the Turkey company, but to the ex-

are so very small, seems to be the utmost punishment to which
any committee-man is liable, for any fault, except direct malversa-

ecutive power. In the extent of its dominion consists, in a great
measure, the pride and dignity of that power; and it is not very

tion, or embezzlement, either of the public money, or of that of
the company; and the fear of the punishment can never be a mo-

likely to fail in attention to what is necessary for the defence of
that dominion. The garrisons at Gibraltar and Minorca, accord-

tive of sufficient weight to force a continual and careful attention
to a business to which he has no other interest to attend. The

ingly, have never been neglected. Though Minorca has been twice
taken, and is now probably lost for ever, that disaster has never

committee are accused of having sent out bricks and stones from
England for the reparation of Cape Coast Castle, on the coast of

been imputed to any neglect in the executive power. I would not,
however, be understood to insinuate, that either of those expen-

Guinea; a business for which parliament had several times granted

sive garrisons was ever, even in the smallest degree, necessary for

605

The Wealth of Nations
the purpose for which they were originally dismembered from the
Spanish monarchy. That dismemberment, perhaps, never served

tune. In a joint-stock company, on the contrary, each partner is
bound only to the extent of his share.

any other real purpose than to alienate from England her natural
ally the king of Spain, and to unite the two principal branches of

The trade of a joint-stock company is always managed by a court
of directors. This court, indeed, is frequently subject, in many

the house of Bourbon in a much stricter and more permanent
alliance than the ties of blood could ever have united them.

respects, to the control of a general court of proprietors. But the
greater part of these proprietors seldom pretend to understand

Joint-stock companies, established either by royal charter, or by
act of parliament, are different in several respects, not only from

any thing of the business of the company; and when the spirit of
faction happens not to prevail among them, give themselves no

regulated companies, but from private copartneries.
First, in a private copartnery, no partner without the consent of

trouble about it, but receive contentedly such halfyearly or yearly
dividend as the directors think proper to make to them. This total

the company, can transfer his share to another person, or introduce a new member into the company. Each member, however,

exemption front trouble and front risk, beyond a limited sum,
encourages many people to become adventurers in joint-stock

may, upon proper warning, withdraw from the copartnery, and
demand payment from them of his share of the common stock. In

companies, who would, upon no account, hazard their fortunes
in any private copartnery. Such companies, therefore, commonly

a joint-stock company, on the contrary, no member can demand
payment of his share from the company; but each member can,

draw to themselves much greater stocks, than any private
copartnery can boast of. The trading stock of the South Sea com-

without their consent, transfer his share to another person, and
thereby introduce a new member. The value of a share in a joint

pany at one time amounted to upwards of thirty-three millions
eight hundred thousand pounds. The divided capital of the Bank

stock is always the price which it will bring in the market; and this
may be either greater or less in any proportion, than the sum which

of England amounts, at present, to ten millions seven hundred
and eighty thousand pounds. The directors of such companies,

its owner stands credited for in the stock of the company.
Secondly, in a private copartnery, each partner is bound for the

however, being the managers rather of other people’s money than
of their own, it cannot well be expected that they should watch

debts contracted by the company, to the whole extent of his for-

over it with the same anxious vigilance with which the partners in

606

Adam Smith
a private copartnery frequently watch over their own. Like the stewards of a rich man, they are apt to consider attention to small mat-

The Royal African company soon found that they could not
maintain the competition against private adventurers, whom, not-

ters as not for their master’s honour, and very easily give themselves
a dispensation from having it. Negligence and profusion, therefore,

withstanding the declaration of rights, they continued for some
time to call interlopers, and to persecute as such. In 1698, how-

must always prevail, more or less, in the management of the affairs
of such a company. It is upon this account, that joint-stock compa-

ever, the private adventurers were subjected to a duty of ten per
cent. upon almost all the different branches of their trade, to be

nies for foreign trade have seldom been able to maintain the competition against private adventurers. They have, accordingly, very sel-

employed by the company in the maintenance of their forts and
garrisons. But, notwithstanding this heavy tax, the company were

dom succeeded without an exclusive privilege; and frequently have
not succeeded with one. Without an exclusive privilege, they have

still unable to maintain the competition. Their stock and credit
gradually declined. In 1712, their debts had become so great, that

commonly mismanaged the trade. With an exclusive privilege, they
have both mismanaged and confined it.

a particular act of parliament was thought necessary, both for their
security and for that of their creditors. It was enacted, that the

The Royal African company, the predecessors of the present African company, had an exclusive privilege by charter; but as that

resolution of two-thirds of these creditors in number and value
should bind the rust, both with regard to the time which should

charter had not been confirmed by act of parliament, the trade, in
consequence of the declaration of rights, was, soon after the Revo-

be allowed to the company for the payment of their debts, and
with regard to any other agreement which it might be thought

lution, laid open to all his majesty’s subjects. The Hudson’s Bay
company are, as to their legal rights, in the same situation as the

proper to make with them concerning those debts. In 1730, their
affairs were in so great disorder, that they were altogether inca-

Royal African company. Their exclusive charter has not been confirmed by act of parliament. The South Sea company, as long as

pable of maintaining their forts and garrisons, the sole purpose
and pretext of their institution. From that year till their final dis-

they continued to be a trading company, had an exclusive privilege confirmed by act of parliament; as have likewise the present

solution, the parliament judged it necessary to allow the annual
sum of £10,000 for that purpose. In 1732, after having been for

united company of merchants trading to the East Indies.

many years losers by the trade of carrying negroes to the West

607

The Wealth of Nations
Indies, they at last resolved to give it up altogether; to sell to the
private traders to America the negroes which they purchased upon

of the ice, can seldom remain above six or eight weeks in those
seas. This advantage of having a cargo ready prepared, could not,

the coast; awl to employ their servants in a trade to the inland
parts of Africa for gold dust, elephants teeth, dyeing drugs, etc.

for several years, be acquired by private adventurers; and without
it there seems to be no possibility of trading to Hudson’s Bay. The

But their success in this more confined trade was not greater than
in their former extensive one. Their affairs continued to go gradu-

moderate capital of the company, which, it is said, does not exceed one hundred and ten thousand pounds, may, besides, be suf-

ally to decline, till at last, being in every respect a bankrupt company, they were dissolved by act of parliament, and their forts and

ficient to enable them to engross the whole, or almost the whole
trade and surplus produce, of the miserable though extensive coun-

garrisons vested in the present regulated company of merchants
trading to Africa. Before the erection of the Royal African com-

try comprehended within their charter. No private adventurers,
accordingly, have ever attempted to trade to that country in com-

pany, there had been three other joint-stock companies successively established, one after another, for the African trade. They

petition with them. This company, therefore, have always enjoyed
an exclusive trade, in fact, though they may have no right to it in

were all equally unsuccessful. They all, however, had exclusive
charters, which, though not confirmed by act of parliament, were

law. Over and above all this, the moderate capital of this company
is said to be divided among a very small number of proprietors.

in those days supposed to convey a real exclusive privilege.
The Hudson’s Bay company, before their misfortunes in the late

But a joint-stock company, consisting of a small number of proprietors, with a moderate capital, approaches very nearly to the

war, had been much more fortunate than the Royal African company. Their necessary expense is much smaller. The whole num-

nature of a private copartnery, and may be capable of nearly the
same degree of vigilance and attention. It is not to be wondered

ber of people whom they maintain in their different settlements
and habitations, which they have honoured with the name of forts,

at, therefore, if, in consequence of these different advantages, the
Hudson’s Bay company had, before the late war, been able to carry

is said not to exceed a hundred and twenty persons. This number,
however, is sufficient to prepare beforehand the cargo of furs and

on their trade with a considerable degree of success. It does not
seem probable, however, that their profits ever approached to what

other goods necessary for loading their ships, which, on account

the late Mr Dobbs imagined them. A much more sober and judi-

608

Adam Smith
cious writer, Mr Anderson, author of the Historical and Chronological Deduction of Commerce, very justly observes, that upon

same terms before them, having been ruined by it, they were allowed, as compensation, to send annually a ship of a certain bur-

examining the accounts which Mr Dobbs himself has given for
several years together, of their exports and imports, and upon

den, to trade directly to the Spanish West Indies. Of the ten voyages which this annual ship was allowed to make, they are said to

making proper allowances for their extraordinary risk and expense,
it does not appear that their profits deserve to be envied, or that

have gained considerably by one, that of the Royal Caroline, in
1731; and to have been losers, more or less, by almost all the rest.

they can much, if at all, exceed the ordinary profits of trade.
The South Sea company never had any forts or garrisons to

Their ill success was imputed, by their factors and agents, to the
extortion and oppression of the Spanish government; but was,

maintain, and therefore were entirely exempted from one great
expense, to which other joint-stock companies for foreign trade

perhaps, principally owing to the profusion and depredations of
those very factors and agents; some of whom are said to have ac-

are subject; but they had an immense capital divided among an
immense number of proprietors. It was naturally to be expected,

quired great fortunes, even in one year. In 1734, the company
petitioned the king, that they might be allowed to dispose of the

therefore, that folly, negligence, and profusion, should prevail in
the whole management of their affairs. The knavery and extrava-

trade and tonnage of their annual ship, on account of the little
profit which they made by it, and to accept of such equivalent as

gance of their stock-jobbing projects are sufficiently known, and
the explication of them would be foreign to the present subject.

they could obtain from the king of Spain.
In 1724, this company had undertaken the whale fishery. Of

Their mercantile projects were not much better conducted. The
first trade which they engaged in, was that of supplying the Span-

this, indeed, they had no monopoly; but as long as they carried it
on, no other British subjects appear to have engaged in it. Of the

ish West Indies with negroes, of which (in consequence of what
was called the Assiento Contract granted them by the treaty of

eight voyages which their ships made to Greenland, they were
gainers by one, and losers by all the rest. After their eighth and last

Utrecht) they had the exclusive privilege. But as it was not expected that much profit could be made by this trade, both the

voyage, when they had sold their ships, stores, and utensils, they
found that their whole loss upon this branch, capital and interest

Portuguese and French companies, who had enjoyed it upon the

included, amounted to upwards of £237,000.

609

The Wealth of Nations
In 1722, this company petitioned the parliament to be allowed
to divide their immense capital of more than thirty-three millions

It ought to be observed, that in the trade which the South Sea
company carried on by means of their annual ship, the only trade

eight hundred thousand pounds, the whole of which had been
lent to government, into two equal parts; the one half, or upwards

by which it ever was expected that they could make any considerable profit, they were not without competitors, either in the for-

of £16,900,000, to be put upon the same footing with other government annuities, and not to be subject to the debts contracted,

eign or in the home market. At Carthagena, Porto Bello, and La
Vera Cruz, they had to encounter the competition of the Spanish

or losses incurred, by the directors of the company, in the prosecution of their mercantile projects; the other half to remain as

merchants, who brought from Cadiz to those markets European
goods, of the same kind with the outward cargo of their ship; and

before, a trading stock, and to be subject to those debts and losses.
The petition was too reasonable not to be granted. In 1733, they

in England they had to encounter that of the English merchants,
who imported from Cadiz goods of the Spanish West Indies, of

again petitioned the parliament, that three-fourths of their trading stock might be turned into annuity stock, and only one-fourth

the same kind with the inward cargo. The goods, both of the Spanish and English merchants, indeed, were, perhaps, subject to higher

remain as trading stock, or exposed to the hazards arising from
the bad management of their directors. Both their annuity and

duties. But the loss occasioned by the negligence, profusion, and
malversation of the servants of the company, had probably been a

trading stocks had, by this time, been reduced more than two
millions each, by several different payments from government; so

tax much heavier than all those duties. That a joint-stock company should be able to carry on successfully any branch of foreign

that this fourth amounted only to £3,662,784:8:6. In 1748, all
the demands of the company upon the king of Spain, in conse-

trade, when private adventurers can come into any sort of open
and fair competition with them, seems contrary to all experience.

quence of the assiento contract, were, by the treaty of Aix-laChapelle, given up for what was supposed an equivalent. An end

The old English East India company was established in 1600,
by a charter from Queen Elizabeth. In the first twelve voyages

was put to their trade with the Spanish West Indies; the remainder
of their trading stock was turned into an annuity stock; and the

which they fitted out for India, they appear to have traded as a
regulated company, with separate stocks, though only in the gen-

company ceased, in every respect, to be a trading company.

eral ships of the company. In 1612, they united into a joint stock.

610

Adam Smith
Their charter was exclusive, and, though not confirmed by act of
parliament, was in those days supposed to convey a real exclusive

their capital, at four per cent. upon the same conditions. But such
was at that time the state of public credit, that it was more conve-

privilege. For many years, therefore, they were not much disturbed
by interlopers. Their capital, which never exceeded £744,000, and

nient for government to borrow two millions at eight per cent.
than seven hundred thousand pounds at four. The proposal of the

of which £50 was a share, was not so exorbitant, nor their dealings
so extensive, as to afford either a pretext for gross negligence and

new subscribers was accepted, and a new East India company established in consequence. The old East India company, however,

profusion, or a cover to gross malversation. Notwithstanding some
extraordinary losses, occassioned partly by the malice of the Dutch

had a right to continue their trade till 1701. They had, at the same
time, in the name of their treasurer, subscribed very artfully three

East India company, and partly by other accidents, they carried
on for many years a successful trade. But in process of time, when

hundred and fifteen thousand pounds into the stock of the new.
By a negligence in the expression of the act of parliament, which

the principles of liberty were better understood, it became every
day more and more doubtful, how far a royal charter, not con-

vested the East India trade in the subscribers to this loan of two
millions, it did not appear evident that they were all obliged to

firmed by act of parliament, could convey an exclusive privilege.
Upon this question the decisions of the courts of justice were not

unite into a joint stock. A few private traders, whose subscriptions
amounted only to seven thousand two hundred pounds, insisted

uniform, but varied with the authority of government, and the
humours of the times. Interlopers multiplied upon them; and to-

upon the privilege of trading separately upon their own stocks,
and at their own risks. The old East India company had a right to

wards the end of the reign of Charles II., through the whole of
that of James II., and during a part of that of William III., re-

a separate trade upon their own stock till 1701; and they had
likewise, both before and after that period, a right, like that or

duced them to great distress. In 1698, a proposal was made to
parliament, of advancing two millions to government, at eight per

other private traders, to a separate trade upon the £315,000, which
they had subscribed into the stock of the new company. The com-

cent. provided the subscribers were erected into a new East India
company, with exclusive privileges. The old East India company

petition of the two companies with the private traders, and with
one another, is said to have well nigh ruined both. Upon a subse-

offered seven hundred thousand pounds, nearly the amount of

quent occasion, in 1750, when a proposal was made to parlia-

611

The Wealth of Nations
ment for putting the trade under the management of a regulated
company, and thereby laying it in some measure open, the East

cisely the two effects which it is the great business of political
economy to promote. The competition, however, of which they

India company, in opposition to this proposal, represented, in very
strong terms, what had been, at this time, the miserable effects, as

gave this doleful account, had not been allowed to be of long continuance. In 1702, the two companies were, in some measure,

they thought them, of this competition. In India, they said, it
raised the price of goods so high, that they were not worth the

united by an indenture tripartite, to which the queen was the third
party; and in 1708, they were by act of parliament, perfectly con-

buying; and in England, by overstocking the market, it sunk their
price so low, that no profit could be made by them. That by a

solidated into one company, by their present name of the United
Company of Merchants trading to the East Indies. Into this act it

more plentiful supply, to the great advantage and conveniency of
the public, it must have reduced very much the price of India

was thought worth while to insert a clause, allowing the separate
traders to continue their trade till Michaelmas 1711; but at the

goods in the English market, cannot well be doubted; but that it
should have raised very much their price in the Indian market,

same time empowering the directors, upon three years notice, to
redeem their little capital of seven thousand two hundred pounds,

seems not very probable, as all the extraordinary demand which
that competition could occasion must have been but as a drop of

and thereby to convert the whole stock of the company into a
joint stock. By the same act, the capital of the company, in conse-

water in the immense ocean of Indian commerce. The increase of
demand, besides, though in the beginning it may sometimes raise

quence of a new loan to government, was augmented from two
millions to three millions two hundred thousand pounds. In 1743,

the price of goods, never fails to lower it in the long-run. It encourages production, and thereby increases the competition of the

the company advanced another million to government. But this
million being raised, not by a call upon the proprietors, but by

producers, who, in order to undersell one another, have recourse
to new divisions or labour and new improvements of art, which

selling annuities and contracting bond-debts, it did not augment
the stock upon which the proprietors could claim a dividend. It

might never otherwise have been thought of. The miserable effects of which the company complained, were the cheapness of

augmented, however, their trading stock, it being equally liable
with the other three millions two hundred thousand pounds, to

consumption, and the encouragement given to production; pre-

the losses sustained, and debts contracted by the company in pros-

612

Adam Smith
ecution of their mercantile projects. From 1708, or at least from
1711, this company, being delivered from all competitors, and

mented their dividend from about six to ten per cent.; that is,
upon their capital of three millions two hundred thousand pounds,

fully established in the monopoly of the English commerce to the
East Indies, carried on a successful trade, and from their profits,

they had increased it by £128,000, or had raised it from one hundred and ninety-two thousand to three hundred and twenty thou-

made annually a moderate dividend to their proprietors. During
the French war, which began in 1741, the ambition of Mr. Dupleix,

sand pounds a-year. They were attempting about this time to raise
it still further, to twelve and a-half per cent., which would have

the French governor of Pondicherry, involved them in the wars of
the Carnatic, and in the politics of the Indian princes. After many

made their annual payments to their proprietors equal to what
they had agreed to pay annually to government, or to £400,000 a-

signal successes, and equally signal losses, they at last lost Madras,
at that time their principal settlement in India. It was restored to

year. But during the two years in which their agreement with government was to take place, they were restrained from any further

them by the treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle; and, about this time the
spirit of war and conquest seems to have taken possession of their

increase of dividend by two successive acts of parliament, of which
the object was to enable them to make a speedier progress in the

servants in India, and never since to have left them. During the
French war, which began in 1755, their arms partook of the gen-

payment of their debts, which were at this time estimated at upwards of six or seven millions sterling. In 1769, they renewed their

eral good fortune of those of Great Britain. They defended Madras, took Pondicherry, recovered Calcutta, and acquired the rev-

agreement with government for five years more, and stipulated,
that during the course of that period, they should be allowed gradu-

enues of a rich and extensive territory, amounting, it was then
said, to upwards of three millions a-year. They remained for sev-

ally to increase their dividend to twelve and a-half per cent; never
increasing it, however, more than one per cent. in one year. This

eral years in quiet possession of this revenue; but in 1767, administration laid claim to their territorial acquisitions, and the rev-

increase of dividend, therefore, when it had risen to its utmost
height, could augment their annual payments, to their propri-

enue arising from them, as of right belonging to the crown; and
the company, in compensation for this claim, agreed to pay to

etors and government together, but by £680,000, beyond what
they had been before their late territorial acquisitions. What the

government £400,000 a-year. They had, before this, gradually aug-

gross revenue of those territorial acquisitions was supposed to

613

The Wealth of Nations
amount to, has already been mentioned; and by an account brought
by the Cruttenden East Indiaman in 1769, the neat revenue, clear

dend to six per cent. but to throw themselves upon the mercy of
govermnent, and to supplicate, first, a release from the further

of all deductions and military charges, was stated at two millions
forty-eight thousand seven hundred and forty-seven pounds. They

payment of the stipulated £400,000 a-year; and, secondly, a loan
of fourteen hundred thousand, to save them from immediate bank-

were said, at the same time, to possess another revenue, arising
partly from lands, but chiefly from the customs established at their

ruptcy. The great increase of their fortune had, it seems, only served
to furnish their servants with a pretext for greater profusion, and a

different settlements, amounting to £439,000. The profits of their
trade, too, according to the evidence of their chairman before the

cover for greater malversation, than in proportion even to that
increase of fortune. The conduct of their servants in India, and

house of commons, amounted, at this time, to at least £400,000
a-year; according to that of their accountant, to at least £500,000;

the general state of their affairs both in India and in Europe, became the subject of a parliamentary inquiry: in consequence of

according to the lowest account, at least equal to the highest dividend that was to be paid to their proprietors. So great a revenue

which, several very important alterations were made in the constitution of their government, both at home and abroad. In India,

might certainly have afforded an augmentation of £680,000 in
their annual payments; and, at the same time, have left a large

their principal settlements or Madras, Bombay, and Calcutta, which
had before been altogether independent of one another, were sub-

sinking fund, sufficient for the speedy reduction of their debt. In
1773, however, their debts, instead of being reduced, were aug-

jected to a governor-general, assisted by a council of four assessors, parliament assuming to itself the first nomination of this

mented by an arrear to the treasury in the payment of the four
hundred thousand pounds; by another to the custom-house for

governor and council, who were to reside at Calcutta; that city
having now become, what Madras was before, the most impor-

duties unpaid; by a large debt to the bank, for money borrowed;
and by a fourth, for bills drawn upon them from India, and wan-

tant of the English settlements in India. The court of the Mayor
of Calcutta, originally instituted for the trial of mercantile causes,

tonly accepted, to the amount of upwards of twelve hundred thousand pounds. The distress which these accumulated claims brought

which arose in the city and neighbourhood, had gradually extended
its jurisdiction with the extension of the empire. It was now re-

upon them, obliged them not only to reduce all at once their divi-

duced and confined to the original purpose of its institution. In-

614

Adam Smith
stead of it, a new supreme court of judicature was established,
consisting of a chief justice and three judges, to be appointed by

purchase a thousand pounds share in India stock, merely for the
influence which he expects to aquire by a vote in the court of

the crown. In Europe, the qualification necessary to entitle a proprietor to vote at their general courts was raised, from five hun-

proprietors. It gives him a share, though not in the plunder, yet in
the appointment of the plunderers of India; the court of directors,

dred pounds, the original price of a share in the stock of the company, to a thousand pounds. In order to vote upon this qualifica-

though they make that appointment, being necessarily more or
less under the influence of the proprietors, who not only elect

tion, too, it was declared necessary, that he should have possessed
it, if acquired by his own purchase, and not by inheritance, for at

those directors, but sometimes over-rule the appointments of their
servants in India. Provided he can enjoy this influence for a few

least one year, instead of six months, the term requisite before.
The court of twenty-four directors had before been chosen annu-

years, and thereby provide for a certain number of his friends, he
frequently cares little about the dividend, or even about the value

ally; but it was now enacted, that each director should, for the
future, be chosen for four years; six of them, however, to go out of

of the stock upon which his vote is founded. About the prosperity
of the great empire, in the government of which that vote gives

office by rotation every year, and not be capable of being re-chosen at the election of the six new directors for the ensuing year. In

him a share, he seldom cares at all. No other sovereigns ever were,
or, from the nature of things, ever could be, so perfectly indiffer-

consequence of these alterations, the courts, both of the proprietors and directors, it was expected, would be likely to act with

ent about the happiness or misery of their subjects, the improvement or waste of their dominions, the glory or disgrace of their

more dignity and steadiness than they had usually done before.
But it seems impossible, by any alterations, to render those courts,

administration, as, from irresistible moral causes, the greater part
of the proprietors of such a mercantile company are, and neces-

in any respect, fit to govern, or even to share in the government of
a great empire; because the greater part of their members must

sarily must be. This indifference, too, was more likely to be increased than diminished by some of the new regulations which

always have too little interest in the prosperity of that empire, to
give any serious attention to what may promote it. Frequently a

were made in consequence of the parliamentary inquiry. By a resolution of the house of commons, for example, it was declared,

man of great, sometimes even a man of small fortune, is willing to

that when the £1,400,000 lent to the company by government,

615

The Wealth of Nations
should be paid, and their bond-debts be reduced to £1,500,000,
they might then, and not till then, divide eight per cent. upon

support the authors of depredations which had been committed
in direct violation of its own authority. With the majority of pro-

their capital; and that whatever remained of their revenues and
neat profits at home should be divided into four parts; three of

prietors, the support even of the authority of their own court might
sometimes be a matter of less consequence than the support of

them to be paid into the exchequer for the use of the public, and
the fourth to be reserved as a fund, either for the further reduction

those who had set that authority at defiance.
The regulations of 1773, accordingly, did not put an end to the

of their bond-debts, or for the discharge of other contingent exigencies which the company might labour under. But if the com-

disorder of the company’s government in India. Notwithstanding
that, during a momentary fit of good conduct, they had at one

pany were bad stewards and bad sovereigns, when the whole of
their neat revenue and profits belonged to themselves, and were at

time collected into the treasury of Calcutta more than £3,000,000
sterling; notwithstanding that they had afterwards extended ei-

their own disposal, they were surely not likely to be better when
three-fourths of them were to belong to other people, and the

ther their dominion or their depredations over a vast accession of
some of the richest and most fertile countries in India, all was

other fourth, though to be laid out for the benefit of the company,
yet to be so under the inspection and with the approbation of

wasted and destroyed. They found themselves altogether unprepared to stop or resist the incursion of Hyder Ali; and in conse-

other people.
It might be more agreeable to the company, that their own ser-

quence of those disorders, the company is now (1784) in greater
distress than ever; and, in order to prevent immediate bankruptcy,

vants and dependants should have either the pleasure of wasting,
or the profit of embezzling, whatever surplus might remain, after

is once more reduced to supplicate the assistance of government.
Different plans have been proposed by the different parties in par-

paying the proposed dividend of eight per cent. than that it should
come into the hands of a set of people with whom those resolu-

liament for the better management of its affairs; and all those plans
seem to agree in supposing, what was indeed always abundantly

tions could scarce fail to set them in some measure at variance.
The interest of those servants and dependants might so far pre-

evident, that it is altogether unfit to govern its territorial possessions. Even the company itself seems to be convinced of its own

dominate in the court of proprietors, as sometimes to dispose it to

incapacity so far, and seems, upon that account willing to give

616

Adam Smith
them up to government.
With the right of possessing forts and garrisons in distant and

jects of the state. By a perpetual monopoly, all the other subjects
of the state are taxed very absurdly in two different ways: first, by

barbarous countries is necessarily connected the right of making
peace and war in those countries. The joint-stock companies, which

the high price of goods, which, in the case of a free trade, they
could buy much cheaper; and, secondly, by their total exclusion

have had the one right, have constantly exercised the other, and
have frequently had it expressly conferred upon them. How un-

from a branch of business which it might be both convenient and
profitable for many of them to carry on. It is for the most worth-

justly, how capriciously, how cruelly, they have commonly exercised it, is too well known from recent experience.

less of all purposes, too, that they are taxed in this manner. It is
merely to enable the company to support the negligence, profu-

When a company of merchants undertake, at their own risk
and expense, to establish a new trade with some remote and bar-

sion, and malversation of their own servants, whose disorderly
conduct seldom allows the dividend of the company to exceed the

barous nation, it may not be unreasonable to incorporate them
into a joint-stock company, and to grant them, in case of their

ordinary rate of profit in trades which are altogether free, and very
frequently makes a fall even a good deal short of that rate. With-

success, a monopoly of the trade for a certain number of years. It
is the easiest and most natural way in which the state can recom-

out a monopoly, however, a joint-stock company, it would appear
from experience, cannot long carry on any branch of foreign trade.

pense them for hazarding a dangerous and expensive experiment,
of which the public is afterwards to reap the benefit. A temporary

To buy in one market, in order to sell with profit in another, when
there are many competitors in both; to watch over, not only the

monopoly of this kind may be vindicated, upon the same principles upon which a like monopoly of a new machine is granted to

occasional variations in the demand, but the much greater and
more frequent variations in the competition, or in the supply which

its inventor, and that of a new book to its author. But upon the
expiration of the term, the monopoly ought certainly to deter-

that demand is likely to get from other people; and to suit with
dexterity and judgment both the quantity and quality of each as-

mine; the forts and garrisons, if it was found necessary to establish
any, to be taken into the hands of government, their value to be

sortment of goods to all these circumstances, is a species of warfare, of which the operations are continually changing, and which

paid to the company, and the trade to be laid open to all the sub-

can scarce ever be conducted successfully, without such an unre-

617

The Wealth of Nations
mitting exertion of vigilance and attention as cannot long be expected from the directors of a joint-stock company. The East In-

admits of little or no variation. Of this kind is, first, the banking
trade; secondly, the trade of insurance from fire and from sea risk,

dia company, upon the redemption of their funds, and the expiration of their exclusive privilege, have a right, by act of parliament,

and capture in time of war; thirdly, the trade of making and maintaining a navigable cut or canal; and, fourthly, the similar trade of

to continue a corporation with a joint stock, and to trade in their
corporate capacity to the East Indies, in common with the rest of

bringing water for the supply of a great city.
Though the principles of the banking trade may appear some-

their fellow subjects. But in this situation, the superior vigilance
and attention of a private adventurer would, in all probability,

what abstruse, the practice is capable of being reduced to strict
rules. To depart upon any occasion from those rules, in conse-

soon make them weary of the trade.
An eminent French author, of great knowledge in matters of

quence of some flattering speculation of extraordinary gain, is almost always extremely dangerous and frequently fatal to the bank-

political economy, the Abbe Morellet, gives a list of fifty-five jointstock companies for foreign trade, which have been established in

ing company which attempts it. But the constitution of jointstock companies renders them in general, more tenacious of es-

different parts of Europe since the year 1600, and which, according to him, have all failed from mismanagement, notwithstand-

tablished rules than any private copartnery. Such companies, therefore, seem extremely well fitted for this trade. The principal bank-

ing they had exclusive privileges. He has been misinformed with
regard to the history of two or three of them, which were not

ing companies in Europe, accordingly, are joint-stock companies,
many of which manage their trade very successfully without any

joint-stock companies and have not failed. But, in compensation,
there have been several joint-stock companies which have failed,

exclusive privilege. The bank of England has no other exclusive
privilege, except that no other banking company in England shall

and which he has omitted.
The only trades which it seems possible for a joint-stock com-

consist of more than six persons. The two banks of Edinburgh are
joint-stock companies, without any exclusive privilege.

pany to carry on successfully, without an exclusive privilege, are
those, of which all the operations are capable of being reduced to

The value of the risk, either from fire, or from loss by sea, or by
capture, though it cannot, perhaps, be calculated very exactly, ad-

what is called a routine, or to such a uniformity of method as

mits, however, of such a gross estimation, as renders it, in some

618

Adam Smith
degree, reducible to strict rule and method. The trade of insurance, therefore, may be carried on successfully by a joint-stock

the clearest evidence, that the undertaking is of greater and more
general utility than the greater part of common trades; and, sec-

company, without any exclusive privilege. Neither the London
Assurance, nor the Royal Exchange Assurance companies have any

ondly, that it requires a greater capital than can easily be collected
into a private copartnery. If a moderate capital were sufficient, the

such privilege.
When a navigable cut or canal has been once made, the man-

great utility of the undertaking would not be a sufficient reason
for establishing a joint-stock company; because, in this case, the

agement of it becomes quite simple and easy, and it is reducible to
strict rule and method. Even the making of it is so, as it may be

demand for what it was to produce, would readily and easily be
supplied by private adventurers. In the four trades above men-

contracted for with undertakers, at so much a mile, and so much
a lock. The same thing may be said of a canal, an aqueduct, or a

tioned, both those circumstances concur.
The great and general utility of the banking trade, when pru-

great pipe for bringing water to supply a great city. Such undertakings, therefore, may be, and accordingly frequently are, very

dently managed, has been fully explained in the second book of
this Inquiry. But a public bank, which is to support public credit,

successfully managed by joint-stock companies, without any exclusive privilege.

and, upon particular emergencies, to advance to government the
whole produce of a tax, to the amount, perhaps, of several mil-

To establish a joint-stock company, however, for any undertaking, merely because such a company might be capable of manag-

lions, a year or two before it comes in, requires a greater capital
than can easily be collected into any private copartnery.

ing it successfully; or, to exempt a particular set of dealers from
some of the general laws which take place with regard to all their

The trade of insurance gives great security to the fortunes of
private people, and, by dividing among a great many that loss

neighbours, merely because they might be capable of thriving, if
they had such an exemption, would certainly not be reasonable.

which would ruin an individual, makes it fall light and easy upon
the whole society. In order to give this security, however, it is nec-

To render such an establishment perfectly reasonable, with the
circumstance of being reducible to strict rule and method, two

essary that the insurers should have a very large capital. Before the
establishment of the two joint-stock companies for insurance in

other circumstances ought to concur. First, it ought to appear with

London, a list, it is said, was laid before the attorney-general, of

619

The Wealth of Nations
one hundred and fifty private usurers, who had failed in the course
of a few years.

spirited purpose of promoting some particular manufacture, over
and above managing their own affairs ill, to the diminution of the

That navigable cuts and canals, and the works which are sometimes necessary for supplying a great city with water, are of great

general stock of the society, can, in other respects, scarce ever fail
to do more harm than good. Notwithstanding the most upright

and general utility, while, at the same time, they frequently require a greater expense than suits the fortunes of private people, is

intentions, the unavoidable partiality of their directors to particular branches of the manufacture, of which the undertakers mis-

sufficiently obvious.
Except the four trades above mentioned, I have not been able to

lead and impose upon them, is a real discouragement to the rest,
and necessarily breaks, more or less, that natural proportion which

recollect any other, in which all the three circumstances requisite
for rendering reasonable the establishment of a joint-stock com-

would otherwise establish itself between judicious industry and
profit, and which, to the general industry of the country, is of all

pany concur. The English copper company of London, the leadsmelting company, the glass-grinding company, have not even the

encouragements the greatest and the most effectual.

pretext of any great or singular utility in the object which they
pursue; nor does the pursuit of that object seem to require any

ART. II. — Of the Expense of the Institution for the Education of Youth.

expense unsuitable to the fortunes of many private men. Whether
the trade which those companies carry on, is reducible to such

The institutions for the education of the youth may, in the same
manner, furnish a revenue sufficient for defraying their own ex-

strict rule and method as to render it fit for the management of a
joint-stock company, or whether they have any reason to boast of

pense. The fee or honorary, which the scholar pays to the master,
naturally constitutes a revenue of this kind.

their extraordinary profits, I do not pretend to know. The mineadventurers company has been long ago bankrupt. A share in the

Even where the reward of the master does not arise altogether
from this natural revenue, it still is not necessary that it should be

stock of the British Linen company of Edinburgh sells, at present,
very much below par, though less so than it did some years ago.

derived from that general revenue of the society, of which the collection and application are, in most countries, assigned to the ex-

The joint-stock companies, which are established for the public-

ecutive power. Through the greater part of Europe, accordingly,

620

Adam Smith
the endowment of schools and colleges makes either no charge
upon that general revenue, or but a very small one. It everywhere

tion is free, the rivalship of competitors, who are all endeavouring
to justle one another out of employment, obliges every man to

arises chiefly from some local or provincial revenue, from the rent
of some landed estate, or from the interest of some sum of money,

endeavour to execute his work with a certain degree of exactness.
The greatness of the objects which are to be acquired by success in

allotted and put under the management of trustees for this particular purpose, sometimes by the sovereign himself, and some-

some particular professions may, no doubt, sometimes animate
the exertions of a few men of extraordinary spirit and ambition.

times by some private donor.
Have those public endowments contributed in general, to pro-

Great objects, however, are evidently not necessary, in order to
occasion the greatest exertions. Rivalship and emulation render

mote the end of their institution? Have they contributed to encourage the diligence, and to improve the abilities, of the teach-

excellency, even in mean professions, an object of ambition, and
frequently occasion the very greatest exertions. Great objects, on

ers? Have they directed the course of education towards objects
more useful, both to the individual and to the public, than those

the contrary, alone and unsupported by the necessity of application, have seldom been sufficient to occasion any considerable

to which it would naturally have gone of its own accord? It should
not seem very difficult to give at least a probable answer to each of

exertion. In England, success in the profession of the law leads to
some very great objects of ambition; and yet how few men, born

those questions.
In every profession, the exertion of the greater part of those who

to easy fortunes, have ever in this country been eminent in that
profession?

exercise it, is always in proportion to the necessity they are under
of making that exertion. This necessity is greatest with those to

The endowments of schools and colleges have necessarily diminished, more or less, the necessity of application in the teach-

whom the emoluments of their profession are the only source from
which they expect their fortune, or even their ordinary revenue

ers. Their subsistence, so far as it arises from their salaries, is evidently derived from a fund, altogether independent of their suc-

and subsistence. In order to acquire this fortune, or even to get
this subsistence, they must, in the course of a year, execute a cer-

cess and reputation in their particular professions.
In some universities, the salary makes but a part, and frequently

tain quantity of work of a known value; and, where the competi-

but a small part, of the emoluments of the teacher, of which the

621

The Wealth of Nations
greater part arises from the honoraries or fees of his pupils. The
necessity of application, though always more or less diminished,

can derive none.
If the authority to which he is subject resides in the body corpo-

is not, in this case, entirely taken away. Reputation in his profession is still of some importance to him, and he still has some de-

rate, the college, or university, of which he himself is a member, and
in which the greater part of the other members are, like himself,

pendency upon the affection, gratitude, and favourable report of
those who have attended upon his instructions; and these

persons who either are, or ought to be teachers, they are likely to
make a common cause, to be all very indulgent to one another, and

favourable sentiments he is likely to gain in no way so well as by
deserving them, that is, by the abilities and diligence with which

every man to consent that his neighbour may neglect his duty, provided he himself is allowed to neglect his own. In the university of

he discharges every part of his duty.
In other universities, the teacher is prohibited from receiving

Oxford, the greater part of the public professors have, for these many
years, given up altogether even the pretence of teaching.

any honorary or fee from his pupils, and his salary constitutes the
whole of the revenue which he derives from his office. His interest

If the authority to which he is subject resides, not so much in
the body corporate, of which he is a member, as in some other

is, in this case, set as directly in opposition to his duty as it is
possible to set it. It is the interest of every man to live as much at

extraneous persons, in the bishop of the diocese, for example, in
the governor of the province, or, perhaps, in some minister of

his ease as he can; and if his emoluments are to be precisely the
same, whether he does or does not perform some very laborious

state, it is not, indeed, in this case, very likely that he will be suffered to neglect his duty altogether. All that such superiors, how-

duty, it is certainly his interest, at least as interest is vulgarly understood, either to neglect it altogether, or, if he is subject to some

ever, can force him to do, is to attend upon his pupils a certain
number of hours, that is, to give a certain number of lectures in

authority which will not suffer him to do this, to perform it in as
careless and slovenly a manner as that authority will permit. If he

the week, or in the year. What those lectures shall be, must still
depend upon the diligence of the teacher; and that diligence is

is naturally active and a lover of labour, it is his interest to employ
that activity in any way from which he can derive some advan-

likely to be proportioned to the motives which he has for exerting
it. An extraneous jurisdiction of this kind, besides, is liable to be

tage, rather than in the performance of his duty, from which he

exercised both ignorantly and capriciously. In its nature, it is arbi-

622

Adam Smith
trary and discretionary; and the persons who exercise it, neither
attending upon the lectures of the teacher themselves, nor per-

The privileges of graduates in arts, in law, physic, and divinity,
when they can be obtained only by residing a certain number of

haps understanding the sciences which it is his business to teach,
are seldom capable of exercising it with judgment. From the inso-

years in certain universities, necessarily force a certain number of
students to such universities, independent of the merit or reputa-

lence of office, too, they are frequently indifferent how they exercise it, and are very apt to censure or deprive him of his office

tion of the teachers. The privileges of graduates are a sort of statutes of apprenticeship, which have contributed to the improve-

wantonly and without any just cause. The person subject to such
jurisdiction is necessarily degraded by it, and, instead of being one

ment of education just as the other statutes of apprenticeship have
to that of arts and manufactures.

of the most respectable, is rendered one of the meanest and most
contemptible persons in the society. It is by powerful protection

The charitable foundations of scholarships, exhibitions, bursaries, etc. necessarily attach a certain number of students to certain

only, that he can effectually guard himself against the bad usage to
which he is at all times exposed; and this protection he is most

colleges, independent altogether of the merit of those particular
colleges. Were the students upon such charitable foundations left

likely to gain, not by ability or diligence in his profession, but by
obsequiousness to the will of his superiors, and by being ready, at

free to choose what college they liked best, such liberty might
perhaps contribute to excite some emulation among different col-

all times, to sacrifice to that will the rights, the interest, and the
honour of the body corporate, of which he is a member. Whoever

leges. A regulation, on the contrary, which prohibited even the
independent members of every particular college from leaving it,

has attended for any considerable time to the administration of a
French university, must have had occasion to remark the effects

and going to any other, without leave first asked and obtained of
that which they meant to abandon, would tend very much to

which naturally result from an arbitrary and extraneous jurisdiction of this kind.

extinguish that emulation.
If in each college, the tutor or teacher, who was to instruct each

Whatever forces a certain number of students to any college or university, independent of the merit or reputation of the teachers, tends

student in all arts and sciences, should not be voluntarily chosen
by the student, but appointed by the head of the college; and if, in

more or less to diminish the necessity of that merit or reputation.

case of neglect, inability, or bad usage, the student should not be

623

The Wealth of Nations
allowed to change him for another, without leave first asked and
obtained; such a regulation would not only tend very much to

what would give him still less trouble, by making them interpret it
to him, and by now and then making an occasional remark upon

extinguish all emulation among the different tutors of the same
college, but to diminish very much, in all of them, the necessity of

it, he may flatter himself that he is giving a lecture. The slightest
degree of knowledge and application will enable him to do this,

diligence and of attention to their respective pupils. Such teachers, though very well paid by their students, might be as much

without exposing himself to contempt or derision, by saying any
thing that is really foolish, absurd, or ridiculous. The discipline of

disposed to neglect them, as those who are not paid by them at all
or who have no other recompense but their salary.

the college, at the same time, may enable him to force all his pupils to the most regular attendance upon his sham lecture, and to

If the teacher happens to be a man of sense, it must be an unpleasant thing to him to be conscious, while he is lecturing to his

maintain the most decent and respectful behaviour during the
whole time of the performance.

students, that he is either speaking or reading nonsense, or what is
very little better than nonsense. It must, too, be unpleasant to him

The discipline of colleges and universities is in general contrived,
not for the benefit of the students, but for the interest, or, more

to observe, that the greater part of his students desert his lectures;
or perhaps, attend upon them with plain enough marks of ne-

properly speaking, for the ease of the masters. Its object is, in all
cases, to maintain the authority of the master, and, whether he

glect, contempt, and derision. If he is obliged, therefore, to give a
certain number of lectures, these motives alone, without any other

neglects or performs his duty, to oblige the students in all cases to
behave to him as if he performed it with the greatest diligence and

interest, might dispose him to take some pains to give tolerably
good ones. Several different expedients, however, may be fallen

ability. It seems to presume perfect wisdom and virtue in the one
order, and the greatest weakness and folly in the other. Where the

upon, which will effectually blunt the edge of all those incitements to diligence. The teacher, instead of explaining to his pupils

masters, however, really perform their duty, there are no examples,
I believe, that the greater part of the students ever neglect theirs.

himself the science in which he proposes to instruct them, may
read some book upon it; and if this book is written in a foreign

No discipline is ever requisite to force attendance upon lectures
which are really worth the attending, as is well known wherever

and dead language, by interpreting it to them into their own, or,

any such lectures are given. Force and restraint may, no doubt, be

624

Adam Smith
in some degree requisite, in order to oblige children, or very young
boys, to attend to those parts of education, which it is thought

gree in which it is necessary to acquire them.
In England, the public schools are much less corrupted than the

necessary for them to acquire during that early period of life; but
after twelve or thirteen years of age, provided the master does his

universities. In the schools, the youth are taught, or at least may
be taught, Greek and Latin; that is, everything which the masters

duty, force or restraint can scarce ever be necessary to carry on any
part of education. Such is the generosity of the greater part of

pretend to teach, or which it is expected they should teach. In the
universities, the youth neither are taught, nor always can find any

young men, that so far from being disposed to neglect or despise
the instructions of their master, provided he shews some serious

proper means of being taught the sciences, which it is the business
of those incorporated bodies to teach. The reward of the school-

intention of being of use to them, they are generally inclined to
pardon a great deal of incorrectness in the performance of his duty,

master, in most cases, depends principally, in some cases almost
entirely, upon the fees or honoraries of his scholars. Schools have

and sometimes even to conceal from the public a good deal of
gross negligence.

no exclusive privileges. In order to obtain the honours of graduation, it is not necessary that a person should bring a certificate of

Those parts of education, it is to be observed, for the teaching
of which there are no public institutions, are generally the best

his having studied a certain number of years at a public school. If,
upon examination, he appears to understand what is taught there,

taught. When a young man goes to a fencing or a dancing school,
he does not, indeed, always learn to fence or to dance very well;

no questions are asked about the place where he learnt it.
The parts of education which are commonly taught in universi-

but he seldom fails of learning to fence or to dance. The good
effects of the riding school are not commonly so evident. The

ties, it may perhaps be said, are not very well taught. But had it
not been for those institutions, they would not have been com-

expense of a riding school is so great, that in most places it is a
public institution. The three most essential parts of literary educa-

monly taught at all; and both the individual and the public would
have suffered a good deal from the want of those important parts

tion, to read, write, and account, it still continues to be more
common to acquire in private than in public schools; and it very

of education.
The present universities of Europe were originally, the greater

seldom happens, that anybody fails of acquiring them to the de-

part of them, ecclesiastical corporations, instituted for the educa-

625

The Wealth of Nations
tion of churchmen. They were founded by the authority of the
pope; and were so entirely under his immediate protection, that

as in ancient Egypt: a language of the priests, and a language of the
people; a sacred and a profane, a learned and an unlearned lan-

their members, whether masters or students, had all of them what
was then called the benefit of clergy, that is, were exempted from

guage. But it was necessary that the priests should understand something of that sacred and learned language in which they were to

the civil jurisdiction of the countries in which their respective universities were situated, and were amenable only to the ecclesiasti-

officiate; and the study of the Latin language therefore made, from
the beginning, an essential part of university education.

cal tribunals. What was taught in the greater part of those universities was suitable to the end of their institution, either theology,

It was not so with that either of the Greek or of the Hebrew
language. The infallible decrees of the church had pronounced

or something that was merely preparatory to theology.
When Christianity was first established by law, a corrupted Latin

the Latin translation of the Bible, commonly called the Latin
Vulgate, to have been equally dictated by divine inspiration, and

had become the common language of all the western parts of Europe. The service of the church, accordingly, and the translation of

therefore of equal authority with the Greek and Hebrew originals.
The knowledge of those two languages, therefore, not being in-

the Bible which were read in churches, were both in that corrupted
Latin; that is, in the common language of the country, After the

dispensably requisite to a churchman, the study of them did not
for along time make a necessary part of the common course of

irruption of the barbarous nations who overturned the Roman
empire, Latin gradually ceased to be the language of any part of

university education. There are some Spanish universities, I am
assured, in which the study of the Greek language has never yet

Europe. But the reverence of the people naturally preserves the established forms and ceremonies of religion long after the circum-

made any part of that course. The first reformers found the Greek
text of the New Testament, and even the Hebrew text of the Old,

stances which first introduced and rendered them reasonable, are
no more. Though Latin, therefore, was no longer understood any-

more favourable to their opinions than the vulgate translation,
which, as might naturally be supposed, had been gradually ac-

where by the great body of the people, the whole service of the
church still continued to be performed in that language. Two differ-

commodated to support the doctrines of the Catholic Church.
They set themselves, therefore, to expose the many errors of that

ent languages were thus established in Europe, in the same manner

translation, which the Roman catholic clergy were thus put under

626

Adam Smith
the necessity of defending or explaining. But this could not well
be done without some knowledge of the original languages, of

branches; physics, or natural philosophy; ethics, or moral philosophy; and logic. This general division seems perfectly agreeable

which the study was therefore gradually introduced into the greater
part of universities; both of those which embraced, and of those

to the nature of things.
The great phenomena of nature, the revolutions of the heavenly

which rejected, the doctrines of the reformation. The Greek language was connected with every part of that classical learning,

bodies, eclipses, comets; thunder and lightning, and other extraordinary meteors; the generation, the life, growth, and dissolution

which, though at first principally cultivated by catholics and Italians, happened to come into fashion much about the same time

of plants and animals; are objects which, as they necessarily excite
the wonder, so they naturally call forth the curiosity of mankind

that the doctrines of the reformation were set on foot. In the greater
part of universities, therefore, that language was taught previous

to inquire into their causes. Superstition first attempted to satisfy
this curiosity, by referring all those wonderful appearances to the

to the study of philosophy, and as soon as the student had made
some progress in the Latin. The Hebrew language having no con-

immediate agency of the gods. Philosophy afterwards endeavoured
to account for them from more familiar causes, or from such as

nection with classical learning, and, except the Holy Scriptures,
being the language of not a single book in any esteem the study of

mankind were better acquainted with, than the agency of the gods.
As those great phenomena are the first objects of human curiosity,

it did not commonly commence till after that of philosophy, and
when the student had entered upon the study of theology.

so the science which pretends to explain them must naturally have
been the first branch of philosophy that was cuitivated. The first

Originally, the first rudiments, both of the Greek and Latin languages, were taught in universities; and in some universities they

philosophers, accordingly, of whom history has preserved any account, appear to have been natural philosophers.

still continue to be so. In others, it is expected that the student
should have previously acquired, at least, the rudiments of one or

In every age and country of the world, men must have attended
to the characters, designs, and actions of one another; and many

both of those languages, of which the study continues to make
everywhere a very considerable part of university education.

reputable rules and maxims for the conduct of human life must
have been laid down and approved of by common consent. As

The ancient Greek philosophy was divided into three great

soon as writing came into fashion, wise men, or those who fancied

627

The Wealth of Nations
themselves such, would naturally endeavour to increase the number of those established and respected maxims, and to express their

Different authors gave different systems, both of natural and
moral philosophy. But the arguments by which they supported

own sense of what was either proper or improper conduct, sometimes in the more artificial form of apologues, like what are called

those different systems, far from being always demonstrations, were
frequently at best but very slender probabilities, and sometimes

the fables of Aesop; and sometimes in the more simple one of
apophthegms or wise sayings, like the proverbs of Solmnon, the

mere sophisms, which had no other foundation but the inaccuracy and ambiguity of common language. Speculative systems,

verses of Theognis and Phocyllides, and some part of the works of
Hesiod. They might continue in this manner, for a long time,

have, in all ages of the world, been adopted for reasons too frivolous to have determined the judgment of any man of common

merely to multiply the number of those maxims of prudence and
morality, without even attempting to arrange them in any very

sense, in a matter of the smallest pecuniary interest. Gross sophistry has scarce ever had any influence upon the opinions of man-

distinct or methodical order, much less to connect them together
by one or more general principles, from which they were all de-

kind, except in matters of philosophy and speculation; and in these
it has frequently had the greatest. The patrons of each system of

ducible, like effects from their natural causes. The beauty of a
systematical arrangement of different observations, connected by

natural and moral philosophy, naturally endeavoured to expose
the weakness of the arguments adduced to support the systems

a few common principles, was first seen in the rude essays of those
ancient times towards a system of natural philosophy. Something

which were opposite to their own. In examining those arguments,
they were necessarily led to consider the difference between a prob-

of the same kind was afterwards attempted in morals. The maxims of common life were arranged in some methodical order, and

able and a demonstrative argument, between a fallacious and a
conclusive one; and logic, or the science of the general principles

connected together by a few common principles, in the same manner as they had attempted to arrange and connect the phenomena

of good and bad reasoning, necessarily arose out of the observations which a scrutiny of this kind gave occasion to; though, in its

of nature. The science which pretends to investigate and explain
those connecting principles, is what is properly called Moral Phi-

origin, posterior both to physics and to ethics, it was commonly
taught, not indeed in all, but in the greater part of the ancient

losophy.

schools of philosophy, previously to either of those sciences. The

628

Adam Smith
student, it seems to have been thought, ought to understand well
the difference between good and bad reasoning, before he was led

considered as making two distinct sciences. What are called metaphysics, or pneumatics, were set in opposition to physics, and were

to reason upon subjects of so great importance.
This ancient division of philosophy into three parts was, in the

cultivated not only as the more sublime, but, for the purposes of a
particular profession, as the more useful science of the two. The

greater part of the universities of Europe, changed for another
into five.

proper subject of experiment and observation, a subject in which
a careful attention is capable of making so many useful discover-

In the ancient philosophy, whatever was taught concerning the
nature either of the human mind or of the Deity, made a part of

ies, was almost entirely neglected. The subject in which, after a
very few simple and almost obvious truths, the most careful atten-

the system of physics. Those beings, in whatever their essence might
be supposed to consist, were parts of the great system of the uni-

tion can discover nothing but obscurity and uncertainty, and can
consequently produce nothing but subtleties and sophisms, was

verse, and parts, too, productive of the most important effects.
Whatever human reason could either conclude or conjecture con-

greatly cultivated.
When those two sciences had thus been set in opposition to one

cerning them, made, as it were, two chapters, though no doubt
two very important ones, of the science which pretended to give

another, the comparison between them naturally gave birth to a
third, to what was called ontology, or the science which treated of

an account of the origin and revolutions of the great system of the
universe. But in the universities of Europe, where philosophy was

the qualities and attributes which were common to both the subjects of the other two sciences. But if subtleties and sophisms com-

taught only as subservient to theology, it was natural to dwell longer
upon these two chapters than upon any other of the science. They

posed the greater part of the metaphysics or pneumatics of the
schools, they composed the whole of this cobweb science of on-

were gradually more and more extended, and were divided into
many inferior chapters; till at last the doctrine of spirits, of which

tology, which was likewise sometimes called metaphysics.
Wherein consisted the happiness and perfection of a man, con-

so little can be known, came to take up as much room in the
system of philosophy as the doctrine of bodies, of which so much

sidered not only as an individual, but as the member of a family,
of a state, and of the great society of mankind, was the object

can be known. The doctrines concerning those two subjects were

which the ancient moral philosophy proposed to investigate. In

629

The Wealth of Nations
that philosophy, the duties of human life were treated of as subservient to the happiness and perfection of human life, But when

mediately connected with the doctrines of pneumatology, with
the immortality of the human soul, and with the rewards and

moral, as well as natural philosophy, came to be taught only as
subservient to theology, the duties of human life were treated of as

punishments which, from the justice of the Deity, were to be expected in a life to come: a short and superficial system of physics

chiefly subservient to the happiness of a life to come. In the ancient philosophy, the perfection of virtue was represented as nec-

usually concluded the course.
The alterations which the universities of Europe thus introduced

essarily productive, to the person who possessed it, of the most
perfect happiness in this life. In the modern philosophy, it was

into the ancient course of philosophy were all meant for the education of ecclesiastics, and to render it a more proper introduction

frequently represented as generally, or rather as almost always, inconsistent with any degree of happiness in this life; and heaven

to the study of theology But the additional quantity of subtlety
and sophistry, the casuistry and ascetic morality which those alter-

was to be earned only by penance and mortification, by the austerities and abasement of a monk, not by the liberal, generous,

ations introduced into it, certainly did not render it more for the
education of gentlemen or men of the world, or more likely either

and spirited conduct of a man. Casuistry, and an ascetic morality,
made up, in most cases, the greater part of the moral philosophy

to improve the understanding or to mend the heart.
This course of philosophy is what still continues to be taught in

of the schools. By far the most important of all the different
branches of philosophy became in this manner by far the most

the greater part of the universities of Europe, with more or less
diligence, according as the constitution of each particular univer-

corrupted.
Such, therefore, was the common course of philosophical edu-

sity happens to render diligence more or less necessary to the teachers. In some of the richest and best endowed universities, the tu-

cation in the greater part of the universities in Europe. Logic was
taught first; ontology came in the second place; pneumatology,

tors content themselves with teaching a few unconnected shreds
and parcels of this corrupted course; and even these they com-

comprehending the doctrine concerning the nature of the human
soul and of the Deity, in the third; in the fourth followed a de-

monly teach very negligently and superficially.
The improvements which, in modern times have been made in

based system of moral philosophy, which was considered as im-

several different branches of philosophy, have not, the greater part

630

Adam Smith
of them, been made in universities, though some, no doubt, have.
The greater part of universities have not even been very forward

begin to apply in good earnest to the real business of the world,
the business which is to employ them during the remainder of

to adopt those improvements after they were made; and several of
those learned societies have chosen to remain, for a long time, the

their days. The greater part of what is taught in schools and universities, however, does not seem to be the most proper prepara-

sanctuaries in which exploded systems and obsolete prejudices
found shelter and protection, after they had been hunted out of

tion for that business.
In England, it becomes every day more and more the custom to

every other corner of the world. In general, the richest and best
endowed universities have been slowest in adopting those improve-

send young people to travel in foreign countries immediately upon
their leaving school, and without sending them to any university.

ments, and the most averse to permit any considerable change in
the established plan of education. Those improvements were more

Our young people, it is said, generally return home much improved by their travels. A young man, who goes abroad at seven-

easily introduced into some of the poorer universities, in which
the teachers, depending upon their reputation for the greater part

teen or eighteen, and returns home at one-and-twenty, returns
three or four years older than he was when he went abroad; and at

of their subsistence, were obliged to pay more attention to the
current opinions of the world.

that age it is very difficult not to improve a good deal in three or
four years. In the course of his travels, he generally acquires some

But though the public schools and universities of Europe were
originally intended only for the education of a particular profes-

knowledge of one or two foreign languages; a knowledge, however, which is seldom sufficient to enable him either to speak or

sion, that of churchmen; and though they were not always very
diligent in instructing their pupils, even in the sciences which were

write them with propriety. In other respects, he commonly returns home more conceited, more unprincipled, more dissipated,

supposed necessary for that profession; yet they gradually drew to
themselves the education of almost all other people, particularly

and more incapable of my serious application, either to study or
to business, than he could well have become in so short a time had

of almost all gentlemen and men of fortune. No better method, it
seems, could be fallen upon, of spending, with any advantage, the

he lived at home. By travelling so very young, by spending in the
most frivolous dissipation the most previous years of his life, at a

long interval between infancy and that period of life at which men

distance from the inspection and control of his parents and rela-

631

The Wealth of Nations
tions, every useful habit, which the earlier parts of his education
might have had some tendency to form in him, instead of being

to soften the temper, and to dispose it for performing all the social
and moral duties of public and private life.

riveted and confirmed, is almost necessarily either weakened or
effaced. Nothing but the discredit into which the universities are

In ancient Rome, the exercises of the Campus Martius answered
the same purpose as those of the Gymnasium in ancient Greece,

allowing themselves to fall, could ever have brought into repute so
very absurd a practice as that of travelling at this early period of

and they seem to have answered it equally well. But among the
Romans there was nothing which corresponded to the musical

life. By sending his son abroad, a father delivers himself, at least
for some time, from so disagreeable an object as that of a son

education of the Greeks. The morals of the Romans, however,
both in private and public life, seem to have been, not only equal,

unemployed, neglected, and going to ruin before his eyes.
Such have been the effects of some of the modern institutions

but, upon the whole, a good deal superior to those of the Greeks.
That they were superior in private life, we have the express testi-

for education.
Different plans and different institutions for education seem to

mony of Polybius, and of Dionysius of Halicarnassus, two authors well acquainted with both nations; and the whole tenor of

have taken place in other ages and nations.
In the republics of ancient Greece, every free citizen was in-

the Greek and Roman history bears witness to the superiority of
the public morals of the Romans. The good temper and modera-

structed, under the direction of the public magistrate, in gymnastic exercises and in music. By gymnastic exercises, it was intended

tion of contending factions seem to be the most essential circumstances in the public morals of a free people. But the factions of

to harden his body, to sharpen his courage, and to prepare him for
the fatigues and dangers of war; and as the Greek militia was, by

the Greeks were almost always violent and sanguinary; whereas,
till the time of the Gracchi, no blood had ever been shed in any

all accounts, one of the best that ever was in the world, this part of
their public education must have answered completely the pur-

Roman faction; and from the time of the Gracchi, the Roman
republic may be considered as in reality dissolved. Notwithstand-

pose for which it was intended. By the other part, music, it was
proposed, at least by the philosophers and historians, who have

ing, therefore, the very respectable authority of Plato, Aristotle,
and Polybius, and notwithstanding the very ingenious reasons by

given us an account of those institutions, to humanize the mind,

which Mr. Montesquieu endeavours to support that authority, it

632

Adam Smith
seems probable that the musical education of the Greeks had no
great effect in mending their morals, since, without any such edu-

ing it in war, and should upon that account, learn his military
exercises. But it left him to learn them of such masters as he could

cation, those of the Romans were, upon the whole, superior. The
respect of those ancient sages for the institutions of their ancestors

find; and it seems to have advanced nothing for this purpose, but
a public field or place of exercise, in which he should practise and

had probably disposed them to find much political wisdom in
what was, perhaps, merely an ancient custom, continued, without

perform them.
In the early ages, both of the Greek and Roman republics, the

interruption, from the earliest period of those societies, to the times
in which they had arrived at a considerable degree of refinement.

other parts of education seem to have consisted in learning to
read, write, and account, according to the arithmetic of the times.

Music and dancing are the great amusements of almost all barbarous nations, and the great accomplishments which are supposed

These accomplishments the richer citizens seem frequently to have
acquired at home, by the assistance of some domestic pedagogue,

to fit any man for entertaining his society. It is so at this day among
the negroes on the coast of Africa. It was so among the ancient

who was, generally, either a slave or a freedman; and the poorer
citizens in the schools of such masters as made a trade of teaching

Celtes, among the ancient Scandinavians, and, as we may learn
from Homer, among the ancient Greeks, in the times preceding

for hire. Such parts of education, however, were abandoned altogether to the care of the parents or guardians of each individual. It

the Trojan war. When the Greek tribes had formed themselves
into little republics, it was natural that the study of those accom-

does not appear that the state ever assumed any inspection or direction of them. By a law of Solon, indeed, the children were ac-

plishments should for a long time make a part of the public and
common education of the people.

quitted from maintaining those parents who had neglected to instruct them in some profitable trade or business.

The masters who instructed the young people, either in music
or in military exercises, do not seem to have been paid, or even

In the progress of refinement, when philosophy and rhetoric
came into fashion, the better sort of people used to send their

appointed by the state, either in Rome or even at Athens, the Greek
republic of whose laws and customs we are the best informed. The

children to the schools of philosophers and rhetoricians, in order
to be instructed in these fashionable sciences. But those schools

state required that every free citizen should fit himself for defend-

were not supported by the public. They were, for a long time,

633

The Wealth of Nations
barely tolerated by it. The demand for philosophy and rhetoric
was, for a long time, so small, that the first professed teachers of

neither forced anybody to go to them, nor rewarded anybody for
having gone to them. The teachers had no jurisdiction over their

either could not find constant employment in any one city, but
were obliged to travel about from place to place. In this manner

pupils, nor any other authority besides that natural authority which
superior virtue and abilities never fail to procure from young people

lived Zeno of Elea, Protagoras, Gorgias, Hippias, and many others. As the demand increased, the school, both of philosophy and

towards those who are entrusted with any part of their education.
At Rome, the study of the civil law made a part of the education,

rhetoric, became stationary, first in Athens, and afterwards in several other cities. The state, however, seems never to have encour-

not of the greater part of the citizens, but of some particular families. The young people, however, who wished to acquire knowledge

aged them further, than by assigning to some of them a particular
place to teach in, which was sometimes done, too, by private do-

in the law, had no public school to go to, and had no other method
of studying it, than by frequenting the company of such of their

nors. The state seems to have assigned the Academy to Plato, the
Lyceum to Aristotle, and the Portico to Zeno of Citta, the founder

relations and friends as were supposed to understand it. It is, perhaps, worth while to remark, that though the laws of the twelve

of the Stoics. But Epicurus bequeathed his gardens to his own
school. Till about the time of Marcus Antoninus, however, no

tables were many of them copied from those of some ancient Greek
republics, yet law never seems to have grown up to be a science in

teacher appears to have had any salary from the public, or to have
had any other emoluments, but what arose from the honorarius

any republic of ancient Greece. In Rome it became a science very
early, and gave a considerable degree of illustration to those citizens

or fees of his scholars. The bounty which that philosophical emperor, as we learn from Lucian, bestowed upon one of the teachers

who had the reputation of understanding it. In the republics of
ancient Greece, particularly in Athens, the ordinary courts of justice

of philosophy, probably lasted no longer than his own life. There
was nothing equivalent to the privileges of graduation; and to have

consisted of numerous, and therefore disorderly, bodies of people,
who frequently decided almost at random, or as clamour, faction,

attended any of those schools was not necessary, in order to be
permitted to practise any particular trade or profession. If the opin-

and party-spirit, happened to determine. The ignominy of an unjust decision, when it was to be divided among five hundred, a

ion of their own utility could not draw scholars to them, the law

thousand, or fifteen hundred people (for some of their courts were

634

Adam Smith
so very numerous), could not fall very heavy upon any individual.
At Rome, on the contrary, the principal courts of justice consisted

The abilities, both civil and military, of the Greeks and Romans, will readily be allowed to have been at least equal to those

either of a single judge, or of a small number of judges, whose characters, especially as they deliberated always in public, could not fail

of any modern nation. Our prejudice is perhaps rather to overrate
them. But except in what related to military exercises, the state

to be very much affected by any rash or unjust decision. In doubtful
cases such courts, from their anxiety to avoid blame, would natu-

seems to have been at no pains to form those great abilities; for I
cannot be induced to believe that the musical education of the

rally endeavour to shelter themselves under the example or precedent of the judges who had sat before them, either in the same or in

Greeks could be of much consequence in forming them. Masters,
however, had been found, it seems, for instructing the better sort

some other court. This attention to practice and precedent, necessarily formed the Roman law into that regular and orderly system in

of people among those nations, in every art and science in which
the circumstances of their society rendered it necessary or conve-

which it has been delivered down to us; and the like attention has
had the like effects upon the laws of every other country where such

nient for them to be instructed. The demand for such instruction
produced, what it always produces, the talent for giving it; and

attention has taken place. The superiority of character in the Romans over that of the Greeks, so much remarked by Polybius and

the emulation which an unrestrained competition never fails to
excite, appears to have brought that talent to a very high degree of

Dionysius of Halicarnassus, was probably more owing to the better
constitution of their courts of justice, than to any of the circum-

perfection. In the attention which the ancient philosophers excited, in the empire which they acquired over the opinions and

stances to which those authors ascribe it. The Romans are said to
have been particularly distinguished for their superior respect to an

principles of their auditors, in the faculty which they possessed of
giving a certain tone and character to the conduct and conversa-

oath. But the people who were accustomed to make oath only before some diligent and well informed court of justice, would natu-

tion of those auditors, they appear to have been much superior to
any modern teachers. In modern times, the diligence of public

rally be much more attentive to what they swore, than they who
were accustomed to do the same thing before mobbish and disor-

teachers is more or less corrupted by the circumstances which render them more or less independent of their success and reputation

derly assemblies.

in their particular professions. Their salaries, too, put the private

635

The Wealth of Nations
teacher, who would pretend to come into competition with them,
in the same state with a merchant who attempts to trade without

Were there no public institutions for education, no system, no
science, would be taught, for which there was not some demand,

a bounty, in competition with those who trade with a considerable one. If he sells his goods at nearly the same price, he cannot

or which the circumstances of the times did not render it either
necessary or convenient, or at least fashionable to learn. A private

have the same profit; and poverty and beggary at least, if not bankruptcy and ruin, will infallibly be his lot. If he attempts to sell

teacher could never find his account in teaching either an exploded
and antiquated system of a science acknowledged to be useful, or

them much dearer, he is likely to have so few customers, that his
circumstances will not be much mended. The privileges of gradu-

a science universally believed to be a mere useless and pedantic
heap of sophistry and nonsense. Such systems, such sciences, can

ation, besides, are in many countries necessary, or at least extremely
convenient, to most men of learned professions, that is, to the far

subsist nowhere but in those incorporated societies for education,
whose prosperity and revenue are in a great measure independent

greater part of those who have occasion for a learned education.
But those privileges can be obtained only by attending the lec-

of their industry. Were there no public institutions for education,
a gentleman, after going through, with application and abilities,

tures of the public teachers. The most careful attendance upon the
ablest instructions of any private teacher cannot always give any

the most complete course of education which the circumstances
of the times were supposed to afford, could not come into the

title to demand them. It is from these different causes that the
private teacher of any of the sciences, which are commonly taught

world completely ignorant of everything which is the common
subject of conversation among gentlemen and men of the world.

in universities, is, in modern times, generally considered as in the
very lowest order of men of letters. A man of real abilities can

There are no public institutions for the education of women,
and there is accordingly nothing useless, absurd, or fantastical, in

scarce find out a more humiliating or a more unprofitable employment to turn them to. The endowments of schools and col-

the common course of their education. They are taught what their
parents or guardians judge it necessary or useful for them to learn,

leges have in this manner not only corrupted the diligence of public teachers, but have rendered it almost impossible to have any

and they are taught nothing else. Every part of their education
tends evidently to some useful purpose; either to improve the natu-

good private ones.

ral attractions of their person, or to form their mind to reserve, to

636

Adam Smith
modesty, to chastity, and to economy; to render them both likely
to became the mistresses of a family, and to behave properly when

operations; frequently to one or two. But the understandings of
the greater part of men are necessarily formed by their ordinary

they have become such. In every part of her life, a woman feels
some conveniency or advantage from every part of her education.

employments. The man whose whole life is spent in performing a
few simple operations, of which the effects, too, are perhaps al-

It seldom happens that a man, in any part of his life, derives any
conveniency or advantage from some of the most laborious and

ways the same, or very nearly the same, has no occasion to exert
his understanding, or to exercise his invention, in finding out ex-

troublesome parts of his education.
Ought the public, therefore, to give no attention, it may be

pedients for removing difficulties which never occur. He naturally
loses, therefore, the habit of such exertion, and generally becomes

asked, to the education of the people? Or, if it ought to give any,
what are the different parts of education which it ought to attend

as stupid and ignorant as it is possible for a human creature to
become. The torpor of his mind renders him not only incapable

to in the different orders of the people? and in what manner ought
it to attend to them?

of relishing or bearing a part in any rational conversation, but of
conceiving any generous, noble, or tender sentiment, and conse-

In some cases, the state of society necessarily places the greater
part of individuals in such situations as naturally form in them,

quently of forming any just judgment concerning many even of
the ordinary duties of private life. Of the great and extensive in-

without any attention of government, almost all the abilities and
virtues which that state requires, or perhaps can admit of. In other

terests of his country he is altogether incapable of judging; and
unless very particular pains have been taken to render him other-

cases, the state of the society does not place the greater part of
individuals in such situations; and some attention of government

wise, he is equally incapable of defending his country in war. The
uniformity of his stationary life naturally corrupts the courage of

is necessary, in order to prevent the almost entire corruption and
degeneracy of the great body of the people.

his mind, and makes him regard, with abhorrence, the irregular,
uncertain, and adventurous life of a soldier. It corrupts even the

In the progress of the division of labour, the employment of the
far greater part of those who live by labour, that is, of the great

activity of his body, and renders him incapable of exerting his
strength with vigour and perseverance in any other employment,

body of the people, comes to be confined to a few very simple

than that to which he has been bred. His dexterity at his own

637

The Wealth of Nations
particular trade seems, in this manner, to be acquired at the expense of his intellectual, social, and martial virtues. But in every

lized state. Though in a rude society there is a good deal of variety
in the occupations of every individual, there is not a great deal in

improved and civilized society, this is the state into which the
labouring poor, that is, the great body of the people, must neces-

those of the whole society. Every man does, or is capable of doing,
almost every thing which any other man does, or is capable of

sarily fall, unless government takes some pains to prevent it.
It is otherwise in the barbarous societies, as they are commonly

being. Every man has a considerable degree of knowledge, ingenuity, and invention but scarce any man has a great degree. The

called, of hunters, of shepherds, and even of husbandmen in that
rude state of husbandry which precedes the improvement of manu-

degree, however, which is commonly possessed, is generally sufficient for conducting the whole simple business of the society. In a

factures, and the extension of foreign commerce. In such societies, the varied occupations of every man oblige every man to exert

civilized state, on the contrary, though there is little variety in the
occupations of the greater part of individuals, there is an almost

his capacity, and to invent expedients for removing difficulties
which are continually occurring. Invention is kept alive, and the

infinite variety in those of the whole society These varied occupations present an almost infinite variety of objects to the contem-

mind is not suffered to fall into that drowsy stupidity, which, in a
civilized society, seems to benumb the understanding of almost all

plation of those few, who, being attached to no particular occupation themselves, have leisure and inclination to examine the occu-

the inferior ranks of people. In those barbarous societies, as they
are called, every man, it has already been observed, is a warrior.

pations of other people. The contemplation of so great a variety of
objects necessarily exercises their minds in endless comparisons

Every man, too, is in some measure a statesman, and can form a
tolerable judgment concerning the interest of the society, and the

and combinations, and renders their understandings, in an extraordinary degree, both acute anti comprehensive. Unless those

conduct of those who govern it. How far their chiefs are good
judges in peace, or good leaders in war, is obvious to the observa-

few, however, happen to be placed in some very particular situations, their great abilities, though honourable to themselves, may

tion of almost every single man among them. In such a society,
indeed, no man can well acquire that improved and refined un-

contribute very little to the good government or happiness of their
society. Notwithstanding the great abilities of those few, all the

derstanding which a few men sometimes possess in a more civi-

nobler parts of the human character may be, in a great measure,

638

Adam Smith
obliterated and extinguished in the great body of the people.
The education of the common people requires, perhaps, in a

head more than the hands. The understandings of those who are
engaged in such employments, can seldom grow torpid for want

civilized and commercial society, the attention of the public, more
than that of people of some rank and fortune. People of some

of exercise. The employments of people of some rank and fortune, besides, are seldom such as harass them from morning to

rank and fortune are generally eighteen or nineteen years of age
before they enter upon that particular business, profession, or trade,

night. They generally have a good deal of leisure, during which
they may perfect themselves in every branch, either of useful or

by which they propose to distinguish themselves in the world.
They have, before that, full time to acquire, or at least to fit them-

ornamental knowledge, of which they may have laid the foundation, or for which they may have acquired some taste in the earlier

selves for afterwards acquiring, every accomplishment which can
recommend them to the public esteem, or render them worthy of

part of life.
It is otherwise with the common people. They have little time

it. Their parents or guardians are generally sufficiently anxious
that they should be so accomplished, and are in most cases, will-

to spare for education. Their parents can scarce afford to maintain
them, even in infancy. As soon as they are able to work, they must

ing enough to lay out the expense which is necessary for that purpose. If they are not always properly educated, it is seldom from

apply to some trade, by which they can earn their subsistence.
That trade, too, is generally so simple and uniform, as to give little

the want of expense laid out upon their education, but from the
improper application of that expense. It is seldom from the want

exercise to the understanding; while, at the same time, their labour
is both so constant and so severe, that it leaves them little leisure

of masters, but from the negligence and incapacity of the masters
who are to be had, and from the difficulty, or rather from the

and less inclination to apply to, or even to think of any thing else.
But though the common people cannot, in any civilized society,

impossibility, which there is, in the present state of things, of finding any better. The employments, too, in which people of some

be so well instructed as people of some rank and fortune; the most
essential parts of education, however, to read, write, and account,

rank or fortune spend the greater part of their lives, are not, like
those of the common people, simple and uniform. They are al-

can be acquired at so early a period of life, that the greater part,
even of those who are to be bred to the lowest occupations, have

most all of them extremely complicated, and such as exercise the

time to acquire them before they can be employed in those occu-

639

The Wealth of Nations
pations. For a very small expense, the public can facilitate, can
encourage and can even impose upon almost the whole body of

principles of geometry and mechanics, and which would not, therefore, gradually exercise and improve the common people in those

the people, the necessity of acquiring those most essential parts of
education.

principles, the necessary introduction to the most sublime, as well
as to the most useful sciences.

The public can facilitate this acquisition, by establishing in every parish or district a little school, where children maybe taught

The public can encourage the acquisition of those most essential parts of education, by giving small premiums, and little badges

for a reward so moderate, that even a common labourer may afford it; the master being partly, but not wholly, paid by the public;

of distinction, to the children of the common people who excel in
them.

because, if he was wholly, or even principally, paid by it, he would
soon learn to neglect his business. In Scotland, the establishment

The public can impose upon almost the whole body of the people
the necessity of acquiring the most essential parts of education, by

of such parish schools has taught almost the whole common people
to read, and a very great proportion of them to write and account.

obliging every man to undergo an examination or probation in
them, before he can obtain the freedom in any corporation, or be

In England, the establishment of charity schools has had an effect
of the same kind, though not so universally, because the establish-

allowed to set up any trade, either in a village or town corporate.
It was in this manner, by facilitating the acquisition of their

ment is not so universal. If, in those little schools, the books by
which the children are taught to read, were a little more instruc-

military and gymnastic exercises, by encouraging it, and even by
imposing upon the whole body of the people the necessity of learn-

tive than they commonly are; and if, instead of a little smattering
in Latin, which the children of the common people are sometimes

ing those exercises, that the Greek and Roman republics maintained the martial spirit of their respective citizens. They facili-

taught there, and which can scarce ever be of any use to them,
they were instructed in the elementary parts of geometry and

tated the acquisition of those exercises, by appointing a certain
place for learning and practising them, and by granting to certain

mechanics; the literary education of this rank of people would,
perhaps, be as complete as can be. There is scarce a common trade,

masters the privilege of teaching in that place. Those masters do
not appear to have had either salaries or exclusive privileges of any

which does not afford some opportunities of applying to it the

kind. Their reward consisted altogether in what they got from

640

Adam Smith
their scholars; and a citizen, who had learnt his exercises in the
public gymnasia, had no sort of legal advantage over one who had

necessarily diminish very much the dangers to liberty, whether
real or imaginary, which are commonly apprehended from a stand-

learnt them privately, provided the latter had learned them equally
well. Those republics encouraged the acquisition of those exer-

ing army. As it would very much facilitate the operations of that
army against a foreign invader; so it would obstruct them as much,

cises, by bestowing little premiums and badges of distinction upon
those who excelled in them. To have gained a prize in the Olym-

if unfortunately they should ever be directed against the constitution of the state.

pic, Isthmian, or Nemaean games, gave illustration, not only to
the person who gained it, but to his whole family and kindred.

The ancient institutions of Greece and Rome seem to have been
much more effectual for maintaining the martial spirit of the great

The obligation which every citizen was under, to serve a certain
number of years, if called upon, in the armies of the republic,

body of the people, than the establishment of what are called the
militias of modern times. They were much more simple. When

sufficiently imposed the necessity of learning those exercises, without which he could not be fit for that service.

they were once established, they executed themselves, and it required little or no attention from government to maintain them

That in the progress of improvement, the practice of military
exercises, unless government takes proper pains to support it, goes

in the most perfect vigour. Whereas to maintain, even in tolerable
execution, the complex regulations of any modern militia, requires

gradually to decay, and, together with it, the martial spirit of the
great body of the people, the example of modern Europe suffi-

the continual and painful attention of government, without which
they are constantly falling into total neglect and disuse. The influ-

ciently demonstrates. But the security of every society must always depend, more or less, upon the martial spirit of the great

ence, besides, of the ancient institutions, was much more universal. By means of them, the whole body of the people was com-

body of the people. In the present times, indeed, that martial spirit
alone, and unsupported by a well-disciplined standing army, would

pletely instructed in the use of arms; whereas it is but a very small
part of them who can ever be so instructed by the regulations of

not, perhaps, be sufficient for the defence and security of any society. But where every citizen had the spirit of a soldier, a smaller

any modern militia, except, perhaps, that of Switzerland. But a
coward, a man incapable either of defending or of revenging him-

standing army would surely be requisite. That spirit, besides, would

self, evidently wants one of the most essential parts of the charac-

641

The Wealth of Nations
ter of a man. He is as much mutilated and deformed in his mind
as another is in his body, who is either deprived of some of its

lated and deformed in a still more essential part of the character of
human nature. Though the state was to derive no advantage from

most essential members, or has lost the use of them. He is evidently the more wretched and miserable of the two; because hap-

the instruction of the inferior ranks of people, it would still deserve its attention that they should not be altogether uninstructed.

piness and misery, which reside altogether in the mind, must necessarily depend more upon the healthful or unhealthful, the muti-

The state, however, derives no inconsiderable advantage from their
instruction. The more they are instructed, the less liable they are

lated or entire state of the mind, than upon that of the body. Even
though the martial spirit of the people were of no use towards the

to the delusions of enthusiasm and superstition, which, among
ignorant nations frequently occasion the most dreadful disorders.

defence of the society, yet, to prevent that sort of mental mutilation, deformity, and wretchedness, which cowardice necessarily

An instructed and intelligent people, besides, are always more decent and orderly than an ignorant and stupid one. They feel them-

involves in it, from spreading themselves through the great body
of the people, would still deserve the most serious attention of

selves, each individually, more respectable, and more likely to obtain the respect of their lawful superiors, and they are, therefore,

government; in the same manner as it would deserve its most serious attention to prevent a leprosy, or any other loathsome and

more disposed to respect those superiors. They are more disposed
to examine, and more capable of seeing through, the interested

offensive disease, though neither mortal nor dangerous, from
spreading itself among them; though, perhaps, no other public

complaints of faction and sedition; and they are, upon that account, less apt to be misled into any wanton or unnecessary oppo-

good might result from such attention, besides the prevention of
so great a public evil.

sition to the measures of government. In free countries, where the
safety of government depends very much upon the favourable judg-

The same thing may be said of the gross ignorance and stupidity which, in a civilized society, seem so frequently to benumb the

ment which the people may form of its conduct, it must surely be
of the highest importance, that they should not be disposed to

understandings of all the inferior ranks of people. A man without
the proper use of the intellectual faculties of a man, is, if possible,

judge rashly or capriciously concerning it.

more contemptible than even a coward, and seems to be muti-

642

Adam Smith
Art. III. — Of the Expense of the Institutions for the Instruction of People of all Ages.

which can recommend them to the esteem of gentlemen; but they
are apt gradually to lose the qualities, both good and bad, which

The institutions for the instruction of people of all ages, are
chiefly those for religious instruction. This is a species of instruc-

gave them authority and influence with the inferior ranks of people,
and which had perhaps been the original causes of the success and

tion, of which the object is not so much to render the people good
citizens in this world, as to prepare them for another and a better

establishment of their religion. Such a clergy, when attacked by a
set of popular and bold, though perhaps stupid and ignorant en-

world in the life to come. The teachers of the doctrine which contains this instruction, in the same manner as other teachers, may

thusiasts, feel themselves as perfectly defenceless as the indolent,
effeminate, and full fed nations of the southern parts of Asia, when

either depend altogether for their subsistence upon the voluntary
contributions of their hearers; or they may derive it from some

they were invaded by the active, hardy, and hungry Tartars of the
north. Such a clergy, upon such an emergency, have commonly

other fund, to which the law of their country may entitle them;
such as a landed estate, a tythe or land tax, an established salary or

no other resource than to call upon the civil magistrate to persecute, destroy, or drive out their adversaries, as disturbers of the

stipend. Their exertion, their zeal and industry, are likely to be
much greater in the former situation than in the latter. In this

public peace. It was thus that the Roman catholic clergy called
upon the civil magistrate to persecute the protestants, and the

respect, the teachers of a new religion have always had a considerable advantage in attacking those ancient and established systems,

church of England to persecute the dissenters; and that in general
every religious sect, when it has once enjoyed, for a century or

of which the clergy, reposing themselves upon their benefices, had
neglected to keep up the fervour of faith and devotion in the great

two, the security of a legal establishment, has found itself incapable of making any vigorous defence against any new sect which

body of the people; and having given themselves up to indolence,
were become altogether incapable of making any vigorous exer-

chose to attack its doctrine or discipline. Upon such occasions,
the advantage, in point of learning and good writing, may some-

tion in defence even of their own establishment. The clergy of an
established and well endowed religion frequently become men of

times be on the side of the established church. But the arts of
popularity, all the arts of gaining proselytes, are constantly on the

learning and elegance, who possess all the virtues of gentlemen, or

side of its adversaries. In England, those arts have been long ne-

643

The Wealth of Nations
glected by the well endowed clergy of the established church, and
are at present chiefly cultivated by the dissenters and by the meth-

ers whose subsistence depends altogether upon their industry. They
are obliged, therefore, to use every art which can animate the de-

odists. The independent provisions, however, which in many places
have been made for dissenting teachers, by means of voluntary

votion of the common people. The establishment of the two great
mendicant orders of St Dominic and St. Francis, it is observed by

subscriptions, of trust rights, and other evasions of the law, seem
very much to have abated the zeal and activity of those teachers.

Machiavel, revived, in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, the
languishing faith and devotion of the catholic church. In Roman

They have many of them become very learned, ingenious, and
respectable men; but they have in general ceased to be very popu-

catholic countries, the spirit of devotion is supported altogether
by the monks, and by the poorer parochial clergy. The great digni-

lar preachers. The methodists, without half the learning of the
dissenters, are much more in vogue.

taries of the church, with all the accomplishments of gentlemen
and men of the world, and sometimes with those of men of learn-

In the church of Rome the industry and zeal of the inferior
clergy are kept more alive by the powerful motive of self-interest,

ing, are careful to maintain the necessary discipline over their inferiors, but seldom give themselves any trouble about the instruc-

than perhaps in any established protestant church. The parochial
clergy derive many of them, a very considerable part of their sub-

tion of the people.
“Most of the arts and professions in a state,” says by far the most

sistence from the voluntary oblations of the people; a source of
revenue, which confession gives them many opportunities of im-

illustrious philosopher and historian of the present age, “are of
such a nature, that, while they promote the interests of the society,

proving. The mendicant orders derive their whole subsistence from
such oblations. It is with them as with the hussars and light infan-

they are also useful or agreeable to some individuals; and, in that
case, the constant rule of the magistrate, except, perhaps, on the

try of some armies; no plunder, no pay. The parochial clergy are
like those teachers whose reward depends partly upon their salary,

first introduction of any art, is, to leave the profession to itself,
and trust its encouragement to the individuals who reap the ben-

and partly upon the fees or honoraries which they get from their
pupils; and these must always depend, more or less, upon their

efit of it. The artizans, finding their profits to rise by the favour of
their customers, increase, as much as possible, their skill and in-

industry and reputation. The mendicant orders are like those teach-

dustry; and as matters are not disturbed by any injudicious tam-

644

Adam Smith
pering, the commodity is always sure to be at all times nearly proportioned to the demand.

will study to prevent; because, in every religion except the true, it
is highly pernicious, and it has even a natural tendency to pervert

“But there are also some callings which, though useful and even
necessary in a state, bring no advantage or pleasure to any indi-

the truth, by infusing into it a strong mixture of superstition, folly,
and delusion. Each ghostly practitioner, in order to render him-

vidual; and the supreme power is obliged to alter its conduct with
regard to the retainers of those professions. It must give them public

self more precious and sacred in the eyes of his retainers, will inspire them with the most violent abhorrence of all other sects, and

encouragement in order to their subsistence; and it must provide
against that negligence to which they will naturally be subject,

continually endeavour, by some novelty, to excite the languid devotion of his audience. No regard will be paid to truth, morals, or

either by annexing particular honours to profession, by establishing a long subordination of ranks, and a strict dependence, or by

decency, in the doctrines inculcated. Every tenet will be adopted
that best suits the disorderly affections of the human frame. Cus-

some other expedient. The persons employed in the finances, fleets,
and magistracy, are instances of this order of men.

tomers will be drawn to each conventicle by new industry and
address, in practising on the passions and credulity of the popu-

“It may naturally be thought, at first sight, that the ecclesiastics
belong to the first class, and that their encouragement, as well as

lace. And, in the end, the civil magistrate will find that he has
dearly paid for his intended frugality, in saving a fixed establish-

that of lawyers and physicians, may safely be entrusted to the liberality of individuals, who are attached to their doctrines, and who

ment for the priests; and that, in reality, the most decent and advantageous composition, which he can make with the spiritual

find benefit or consolation from their spiritual ministry and assistance. Their industry and vigilance will, no doubt, be whetted by

guides, is to bribe their indolence, by assigning stated salaries to
their profession, and rendering it superfluous for them to be far-

such an additional motive; and their skill in the profession, as well
as their address in governing the minds of the people, must receive

ther active, than merely to prevent their flock from straying in
quest of new pastors. And in this manner ecclesiastical establish-

daily increase, from their increasing practice, study, and attention.
“But if we consider the matter more closely, we shall find that

ments, though commonly they arose at first from religious views,
prove in the end advantageous to the political interests of society.”

this interested diligence of the clergy is what every wise legislator

But whatever may have been the good or bad effects of the inde-

645

The Wealth of Nations
pendent provision of the clergy, it has, perhaps, been very seldom
bestowed upon them from any view to those effects. Times of

spoil. They were weary, besides, of humouring the people, and of
depending upon their caprice for a subsistence. In making this de-

violent religious controversy have generally been times of equally
violent political faction. Upon such occasions, each political party

mand, therefore, they consulted their own ease and comfort, without troubling themselves about the effect which it might have, in

has either found it, or imagined it, for his interest, to league itself
with some one or other of the contending religious sects. But this

future times, upon the influence and authority of their order. The
civil magistrate, who could comply with their demand only by giv-

could be done only by adopting, or, at least, by favouring the
tenets of that particular sect. The sect which had the good fortune

ing them something which he would have chosen much rather to
take, or to keep to himself, was seldom very forward to grant it.

to be leagued with the conquering party necessarily shared in the
victory of its ally, by whose favour and protection it was soon

Necessity, however, always forced him to submit at last, though frequently not till after many delays, evasions, and affected excuses.

enabled, in some degree, to silence and subdue all its adversaries.
Those adversaries had generally leagued themselves with the en-

But if politics had never called in the aid of religion, had the
conquering party never adopted the tenets of one sect more than

emies of the conquering party, and were, therefore the enemies of
that party. The clergy of this particular sect having thus become

those of another, when it had gained the victory, it would probably have dealt equally and impartially with all the different sects,

complete masters of the field, and their influence and authority
with the great body of the people being in its highest vigour, they

and have allowed every man to choose his own priest, and his own
religion, as he thought proper. There would, and, in this case, no

were powerful enough to overawe the chiefs and leaders of their
own party, and to oblige the civil magistrate to respect their opin-

doubt, have been, a great multitude of religious sects. Almost every different congregation might probably have had a little sect by

ions and inclinations. Their first demand was generally that he
should silence and subdue all their adversaries; and their second,

itself, or have entertained some peculiar tenets of its own. Each
teacher, would, no doubt, have felt himself under the necessity of

that he should bestow an independent provision on themselves.
As they had generally contributed a good deal to the victory, it

making the utmost exertion, and of using every art, both to preserve and to increase the number of his disciples. But as every

seemed not unreasonable that they should have some share in the

other teacher would have felt himself under the same necessity,

646

Adam Smith
the success of no one teacher, or sect of teachers, could have been
very great. The interested and active zeal of religious teachers can

wise men have, in all ages of the world, wished to see established;
but such as positive law has, perhaps, never yet established, and

be dangerous and troublesome only where there is either but one
sect tolerated in the society, or where the whole of a large society is

probably never will establish in any country; because, with regard
to religion, positive law always has been, and probably always will

divided into two or three great sects; the teachers of each acting by
concert, and under a regular discipline and subordination. But

be, more or less influenced by popular superstition and enthusiasm. This plan of ecclesiastical government, or, more properly, of

that zeal must be altogether innocent, where the society is divided
into two or three hundred, or, perhaps, into as many thousand

no ecclesiastical government, was what the sect called Independents (a sect, no doubt, of very wild enthusiasts), proposed to

small sects, of which no one could be considerable enough to disturb the public tranquillity. The teachers of each sect, seeing them-

establish in England towards the end of the civil war. If it had
been established, though of a very unphilosophical origin, it would

selves surrounded on all sides with more adversaries than friends,
would be obliged to learn that candour and moderation which are

probably, by this time, have been productive of the most philosophical good temper and moderation with regard to every sort of

so seldom to be found among the teachers of those great sects,
whose tenets, being supported by the civil magistrate, are held in

religious principle. It has been established in Pennsylvania, where,
though the quakers happen to be the most numerous, the law, in

veneration by almost all the inhabitants of extensive kingdoms
and empires, and who, therefore, see nothing round them but

reality, favours no one sect more than another; and it is there said
to have been productive of this philosophical good temper and

followers, disciples, and humble admirers. The teachers of each
little sect, finding themselves almost alone, would be obliged to

moderation,
But though this equality of treatment should not be productive

respect those of almost every other sect; and the concessions which
they would mutually find in both convenient and agreeable to

of this good temper and moderation in all, or even in the greater
part of the religious sects of a particular country; yet, provided

make one to another, might in time, probably reduce the doctrine
of the greater part of them to that pure and rational religion, free

those sects were sufficiently numerous, and each of them consequently too small to disturb the public tranquillity, the excessive

from every mixture of absurdity, imposture, or fanaticism, such as

zeal of each for its particular tenets could not well be productive

647

The Wealth of Nations
of any very hurtful effects, but, on the contrary, of several good
ones; and if the government was perfectly decided, both to let

either excused or pardoned altogether. In the austere system, on
the contrary, those excesses are regarded with the utmost abhor-

them all alone, and to oblige them all to let alone one another,
there is little danger that they would not of their own accord,

rence and detestation. The vices of levity are always ruinous to the
common people, and a single week’s thoughtlessness and dissipa-

subdivide themselves fast enough, so as soon to become sufficiently
numerous.

tion is often sufficient to undo a poor workman for ever, and to
drive him, through despair, upon committing the most enormous

In every civilized society, in every society where the distinction
of ranks has once been completely established, there have been

crimes. The wiser and better sort of the common people, therefore, have always the utmost abhorrence and detestation of such

always two different schemes or systems of morality current at the
same time; of which the one may be called the strict or austere; the

excesses, which their experience tells them are so immediately fatal to people of their condition. The disorder and extravagance of

other the liberal, or, if you will, the loose system. The former is
generally admired and revered by the common people; the latter is

several years, on the contrary, will not always ruin a man of fashion; and people of that rank are very apt to consider the power of

commonly more esteemed and adopted by what are called the
people of fashion. The degree of disapprobation with which we

indulging in some degree of excess, as one of the advantages of
their fortune; and the liberty of doing so without censure or re-

ought to mark the vices of levity, the vices which are apt to arise
from great prosperity, and from the excess of gaiety and good

proach, as one of the privileges which belong to their station. In
people of their own station, therefore, they regard such excesses

humour, seems to constitute the principal distinction between those
two opposite schemes or systems. In the liberal or loose system,

with but a small degree of disapprobation, and censure them either very slightly or not at all.

luxury, wanton, and even disorderly mirth, the pursuit of pleasure
to some degree of intemperance, the breach of chastity, at least in

Almost all religious sects have begun among the common people,
from whom they have generally drawn their earliest, as well as

one of the two sexes, etc. provided they are not accompanied with
gross indecency, and do not lead to falsehood and injustice, are

their most numerous proselytes. The austere system of morality
has, accordingly, been adopted by those sects almost constantly,

generally treated with a good deal of indulgence, and are easily

or with very few exceptions; for there have been some. It was the

648

Adam Smith
system by which they could best recommend themselves to that
order of people, to whom they first proposed their plan of refor-

attended to by nobody; and he is, therefore, very likely to neglect
it himself, and to abandon himself to every sort of low profligacy

mation upon what had been before established. Many of them,
perhaps the greater part of them, have even endeavoured to gain

and vice. He never emerges so effectually from this obscurity, his
conduct never excites so much the attention of any respectable

credit by refining upon this austere system, and by carrying it to
some degree of folly and extravagance; and this excessive rigour

society, as by his becoming the member of a small religious sect.
He from that moment acquires a degree of consideration which

has frequently recommended them, more than any thing else, to
the respect and veneration of the common people.

he never had before. All his brother sectaries are, for the credit of
the sect, interested to observe his conduct; and, if he gives occa-

A man of rank and fortune is, by his station, the distinguished
member of a great society, who attend to every part of his con-

sion to any scandal, if he deviates very much from those austere
morals which they almost always require of one another, to pun-

duct, and who thereby oblige him to attend to every part of it
himself. His authority and consideration depend very much upon

ish him by what is always a very severe punishment, even where
no evil effects attend it, expulsion or excommunication from the

the respect which this society bears to him. He dares not do anything which would disgrace or discredit him in it; and he is obliged

sect. In little religious sects, accordingly, the morals of the common people have been almost always remarkably regular and or-

to a very strict observation of that species of morals, whether liberal or austere, which the general consent of this society prescribes

derly; generally much more so than in the established church. The
morals of those little sects, indeed, have frequently been rather

to persons of his rank and fortune. A man of low condition, on
the contrary, is far from being a distinguished member of any

disagreeably rigorous and unsocial.
There are two very easy and effectual remedies, however, by

great society. While he remains in a country village, his conduct
may be attended to, and he may be obliged to attend to it himself.

whose joint operation the state might, without violence, correct
whatever was unsocial or disagreeably rigorous in the morals of all

In this situation, and in this situation only, he may have what is
called a character to lose. But as soon as he comes into a great city,

the little sects into which the country was divided.
The first of those remedies is the study of science and philoso-

he is sunk in obscurity and darkness. His conduct is observed and

phy, which the state might render almost universal among all people

649

The Wealth of Nations
of middling or more than middling rank and fortune; not by giving salaries to teachers in order to make them negligent and idle,

and hatred to all the fanatical promoters of those popular frenzies.
The gaiety and good humour which those diversions inspire, were

but by instituting some sort of probation, even in the higher and
more difficult sciences, to be undergone by every person before he

altogether inconsistent with that temper of mind which was fittest for their purpose, or which they could best work upon. Dra-

was permitted to exercise any liberal profession, or before he could
be received as a candidate for any honourable office, of trust or

matic representations, besides, frequently exposing their artifices
to public ridicule, and sometimes even to public execration, were,

profit. if the state imposed upon this order of men the necessity of
learning, it would have no occasion to give itself any trouble about

upon that account, more than all other diversions, the objects of
their peculiar abhorrence.

providing them with proper teachers. They would soon find better teachers for themselves, than any whom the state could pro-

In a country where the law favoured the teachers of no one religion more than those of another, it would not be necessary that any

vide for them. Science is the great antidote to the poison of enthusiasm and superstition; and where all the superior ranks of people

of them should have any particular or immediate dependency upon
the sovereign or executive power; or that he should have anything

were secured from it, the inferior ranks could not be much exposed to it.

to do either in appointing or in dismissing them from their offices.
In such a situation, he would have no occasion to give himself any

The second of those remedies is the frequency and gaiety of
public diversions. The state, by encouraging, that is, by giving

concern about them, further than to keep the peace among them,
in the same manner as among the rest of his subjects, that is, to

entire liberty to all those who, from their own interest, would
attempt, without scandal or indecency, to amuse and divert the

hinder them from persecuting, abusing, or oppressing one another.
But it is quite otherwise in countries where there is an established or

people by painting, poetry, music, dancing; by all sorts of dramatic representations and exhibitions; would easily dissipate, in

governing religion. The sovereign can in this case never be secure,
unless he has the means of influencing in a considerable degree the

the greater part of them, that melancholy and gloomy humour
which is almost always the nurse of popular superstition and en-

greater part of the teachers of that religion.
The clergy of every established church constitute a great incor-

thusiasm. Public diversions have always been the objects of dread

poration. They can act in concert, and pursue their interest upon

650

Adam Smith
one plan, and with one spirit as much as if they were under the
direction of one man; and they are frequently, too, under such

thority of religion is superior to every other authority. The fears
which it suggests conquer all other fears. When the authorized

direction. Their interest as an incorporated body is never the same
with that of the sovereign, and is sometimes directly opposite to

teachers of religion propagate through the great body of the people,
doctrines subversive of the authority of the sovereign, it is by vio-

it. Their great interest is to maintain their authority with the people,
and this authority depends upon the supposed certainty and im-

lence only, or by the force of a standing army, that he can maintain his authority. Even a standing army cannot in this case give

portance of the whole doctrine which they inculcate, and upon
the supposed necessity of adopting every part of it with the most

him any lasting security; because if the soldiers are not foreigners,
which can seldom be the case, but drawn from the great body of

implicit faith, in order to avoid eternal misery. Should the sovereign have the imprudence to appear either to deride, or doubt

the people, which must almost always be the case, they are likely
to be soon corrupted by those very doctrines. The revolutions which

himself of the most trifling part of their doctrine, or from humanity, attempt to protect those who did either the one or the other,

the turbulence of the Greek clergy was continually occasioning at
Constantinople, as long as the eastern empire subsisted; the con-

the punctilious honour of a clergy, who have no sort of dependency upon him, is immediately provoked to proscribe him as a

vulsions which, during the course of several centuries, the turbulence of the Roman clergy was continually occasioning in every

profane person, and to employ all the terrors of religion, in order
to oblige the people to transfer their allegiance to some more or-

part of Europe, sufficiently demonstrate how precarious and insecure must always be the situation of the sovereign, who has no

thodox and obedient prince. Should he oppose any of their pretensions or usurpations, the danger is equally great. The princes

proper means of influencing the clergy of the established and governing religion of his country.

who have dared in this manner to rebel against the church, over
and above this crime of rebellion, have generally been charged,

Articles of faith, as well as all other spiritual matters, it is evident enough, are not within the proper department of a temporal

too, with the additional crime of heresy, notwithstanding their
solemn protestations of their faith, and humble submission to every

sovereign, who, though he may be very well qualified for protecting, is seldom supposed to be so for instructing the people. With

tenet which she thought proper to prescribe to them. But the au-

regard to such matters, therefore, his authority can seldom be suf-

651

The Wealth of Nations
ficient to counterbalance the united authority of the clergy of the
established church. The public tranquillity, however, and his own

he would only render, by such persecution, both them and their
doctrine ten times more popular, and therefore ten times more

security, may frequently depend upon the doctrines which they
may think proper to propagate concerning such matters. As he

troublesome and dangerous, than they had been before. Fear is in
almost all cases a wretched instrument of govermnent, and ought

can seldom directly oppose their decision, therefore, with proper
weight and authority, it is necessary that he should be able to in-

in particular never to be employed against any order of men who
have the smallest pretensions to independency. To attempt to ter-

fluence it; and he can influence it only by the fears and expectations which he may excite in the greater part of the individuals of

rify them, serves only to irritate their bad humour, and to confirm
them in an opposition, which more gentle usage, perhaps, might

the order. Those fears and expectations may consist in the fear of
deprivation or other punishment, and in the expectation of fur-

easily induce them either to soften, or to lay aside altogether. The
violence which the French government usually employed in order

ther preferment.
In all Christian churches, the benefices of the clergy are a sort of

to oblige all their parliaments, or sovereign courts of justice, to
enregister any unpopular edict, very seldom succeeded. The means

freeholds, which they enjoy, not during pleasure, but during life
or good behaviour. If they held them by a more precarious tenure,

commonly employed, however, the imprisonment of all the refractory members, one would think, were forcible enough. The

and were liable to be turned out upon every slight disobligation
either of the sovereign or of his ministers, it would perhaps be

princes of the house of Stuart sometimes employed the like means
in order to influence some of the members of the parliament of

impossible for them to maintain their authority with the people,
who would then consider them as mercenary dependents upon

England, and they generally found them equally intractable. The
parliament of England is now managed in another manner; and a

the court, in the sincerity of whose instructions they could no
longer have any confidence. But should the sovereign attempt ir-

very small experiment, which the duke of Choiseul made, about
twelve years ago, upon the parliament of Paris, demonstrated suf-

regularly, and by violence, to deprive any number of clergymen of
their freeholds, on account, perhaps, of their having propagated,

ficiently that all the parliaments of France might have been managed still more easily in the same manner. That experiment was

with more than ordinary zeal, some factious or seditious doctrine,

not pursued. For though management and persuasion are always

652

Adam Smith
the easiest and safest instruments of government as force and violence are the worst and the most dangerous; yet such, it seems, is

the people of the episcopal city. The people did not long retain
their right of election; and while they did retain it, they almost

the natural insolence of man, that he almost always disdains to
use the good instrument, except when he cannot or dare not use

always acted under the influence of the clergy, who, in such spiritual matters, appeared to be their natural guides. The clergy, how-

the bad one. The French government could and durst use force,
and therefore disdained to use management and persuasion. But

ever, soon grew weary of the trouble of managing them, and found
it easier to elect their own bishops themselves. The abbot, in the

there is no order of men, it appears I believe, from the experience
of all ages, upon whom it is so dangerous or rather so perfectly

same manner, was elected by the monks of the monastery, at least
in the greater part of abbacies. All the inferior ecclesiastical ben-

ruinous, to employ force and violence, as upon the respected clergy
of an established church. The rights, the privileges, the personal

efices comprehended within the diocese were collated by the bishop,
who bestowed them upon such ecclesiastics as he thought proper.

liberty of every individual ecclesiastic, who is upon good terms
with his own order, are, even in the most despotic governments,

All church preferments were in this manner in the disposal of the
church. The sovereign, though he might have some indirect influ-

more respected than those of any other person of nearly equal
rank and fortune. It is so in every gradation of despotism, from

ence in those elections, and though it was sometimes usual to ask
both his consent to elect, and his approbation of the election, yet

that of the gentle and mild government of Paris, to that of the
violent and furious government of Constantinople. But though

had no direct or sufficient means of managing the clergy. The
ambition of every clergyman naturally led him to pay court, not

this order of men can scarce ever be forced, they may be managed
as easily as any other; and the security of the sovereign, as well as

so much to his sovereign as to his own order, from which only he
could expect preferment.

the public tranquillity, seems to depend very much upon the means
which he has of managing them; and those means seem to consist

Through the greater part of Europe, the pope gradually drew to
himself, first the collation of almost all bishoprics and abbacies, or

altogether in the preferment which he has to bestow upon them.
In the ancient constitution of the Christian church, the bishop

of what were called consistorial benefices, and afterwards, by various machinations and pretences, of the greater part of inferior

of each diocese was elected by the joint votes of the clergy and of

benefices comprehended within each diocese, little more being

653

The Wealth of Nations
left to the bishop than what was barely necessary to give him a
decent authority with his own clergy. By this arrangement the

jurisdictions were established, of the same kind with those of the
great barons, and for the same reason. In those great landed es-

condition of the sovereign was still worse than it had been before.
The clergy of all the different countries of Europe were thus formed

tates, the clergy, or their bailiffs, could easily keep the peace, without the support or assistance either of the king or of any other

into a sort of spiritual army, dispersed in different quarters indeed, but of which all the movements and operations could now

person; and neither the king nor any other person could keep the
peace there without the support and assistance of the clergy. The

be directed by one head, and conducted upon one uniform plan.
The clergy of each particular country might be considered as a

jurisdictions of the clergy, therefore, in their particular baronies or
manors, were equally independent, and equally exclusive of the

particular detachment of that army, of which the operations could
easily be supported and seconded by all the other detachments

authority of the king’s courts, as those of the great temporal lords.
The tenants of the clergy were, like those of the great barons, al-

quartered in the different countries round about. Each detachment was not only independent of the sovereign of the country in

most all tenants at will, entirely dependent upon their immediate
lords, and, therefore, liable to be called out at pleasure, in order to

which it was quartered, and by which it was maintained, but dependent upon a foreign sovereign, who could at any time turn its

fight in any quarrel in which the clergy might think proper to
engage them. Over and above the rents of those estates, the clergy

arms against the sovereign of that particular country, and support
them by the arms of all the other detachments.

possessed in the tithes a very large portion of the rents of all the
other estates in every kingdom of Europe. The revenues arising

Those arms were the most formidable that can well be imagined. In the ancient state of Europe, before the establishment of

from both those species of rents were, the greater part of them,
paid in kind, in corn, wine, cattle, poultry, etc. The quantity ex-

arts and manufactures, the wealth of the clergy gave them the
same sort of influence over the common people which that of the

ceeded greatly what the clergy could themselves consume; and
there were neither arts nor manufactures, for the produce of which

great barons gave them over their respective vassals, tenants, and
retainers. In the great landed estates, which the mistaken piety

they could exchange the surplus. The clergy could derive advantage from this immense surplus in no other way than by employ-

both of princes and private persons had bestowed upon the church,

ing it, as the great barons employed the like surplus of their rev-

654

Adam Smith
enues, in the most profuse hospitality, and in the most extensive
charity. Both the hospitality and the charity of the ancient clergy,

were constantly, and almost all occasionally, fed by them. Everything belonging or related to so popular an order, its possessions,

accordingly, are said to have been very great. They not only maintained almost the whole poor of every kingdom, but many knights

its privileges, its doctrines, necessarily appeared sacred in the eyes
of the common people; and every violation of them, whether real

and gentlemen had frequently no other means of subsistence than
by travelling about from monastery to monastery, under pretence

or pretended, the highest act of sacrilegious wickedness and profaneness. In this state of things, if the sovereign frequently found

of devotion, but in reality to enjoy the hospitality of the clergy.
The retainers of some particular prelates were often as numerous

it difficult to resist the confederacy of a few of the great nobility,
we cannot wonder that he should find it still more so to resist the

as those of the greatest lay-lords; and the retainers of all the clergy
taken together were, perhaps, more numerous than those of all

united force of the clergy of his own dominions, supported by
that of the clergy of all the neighbouring dominions. In such cir-

the lay-lords. There was always much more union among the clergy
than among the lay-lords. The former were under a regular disci-

cumstances, the wonder is, not that he was sometimes obliged to
yield, but that he ever was able to resist.

pline and subordination to the papal authority. The latter were
under no regular discipline or subordination, but almost always

The privileges of the clergy in those ancient times (which to us,
who live in the present times, appear the most absurd), their total

equally jealous of one another, and of the king. Though the tenants and retainers of the clergy, therefore, had both together been

exemption from the secular jurisdiction, for example, or what in
England was called the benefit of clergy, were the natural, or rather

less numerous than those of the great lay-lords, and their tenants
were probably much less numerous, yet their union would have

the necessary, consequences of this state of things. How dangerous must it have been for the sovereign to attempt to punish a

rendered them more formidable. The hospitality and charity of
the clergy, too, not only gave them the command of a great tem-

clergyman for any crime whatever, if his order were disposed to
protect him, and to represent either the proof as insufficient for

poral force, but increased very much the weight of their spiritual
weapons. Those virtues procured them the highest respect and

convicting so holy a man, or the punishment as too severe to be
inflicted upon one whose person had been rendered sacred by re-

veneration among all the inferior ranks of people, of whom many

ligion? The sovereign could, in such circumstances, do no better

655

The Wealth of Nations
than leave him to be tried by the ecclesiastical courts, who, for the
honour of their own order, were interested to restrain, as much as

was, by the natural course of things, first weakened, and afterwards in part destroyed; and is now likely, in the course of a few

possible, every member of it from committing enormous crimes,
or even from giving occasion to such gross scandal as might dis-

centuries more, perhaps, to crumble into ruins altogether.
The gradual improvements of arts, manufactures, and commerce,

gust the minds of the people.
In the state in which things were, through the greater part of

the same causes which destroyed the power of the great barons,
destroyed, in the same manner, through the greater part of Eu-

Europe, during the tenth, eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth centuries, and for some time both before and after that period, the con-

rope, the whole temporal manufactures, and commerce, the clergy,
like the great barons, found something for which they could ex-

stitution of the church of Rome may be considered as the most
formidable combination that ever was formed against the author-

change their rude produce, and thereby discovered the means of
spending their whole revenues upon their own persons, without

ity and security of civil government, as well as against the liberty,
reason, and happiness of mankind, which can flourish only where

giving any considerable share of them to other people. Their charity became gradually less extensive, their hospitality less liberal, or

civil government is able to protect them. In that constitution, the
grossest delusions of superstition were supported in such a man-

less profuse. Their retainers became consequently less numerous,
and, by degrees, dwindled away altogether. The clergy, too, like

ner by the private interests of so great a number of people, as put
them out of all danger from any assault of human reason; because,

the great barons, wished to get a better rent from their landed
estates, in order to spend it, in the same manner, upon the gratifi-

though human reason might, perhaps, have been able to unveil,
even to the eyes of the common people, some of the delusions of

cation of their own private vanity and folly. But this increase of
rent could be got only by granting leases to their tenants, who

superstition, it could never have dissolved the ties of private interest. Had this constitution been attacked by no other enemies but

thereby became, in a great measure, independent of them. The
ties of interest, which bound the inferior ranks of people to the

the feeble efforts of human reason, it must have endured for ever.
But that immense and well-built fabric, which all the wisdom and

clergy, were in this manner gradually broken and dissolved. They
were even broken and dissolved sooner than those which bound

virtue of man could never have shaken, much less have overturned,

the same ranks of people to the great barons; because the benefices

656

Adam Smith
of the church being, the greater part of them, much smaller than
the estates of the great barons, the possessor of each benefice was

of each abbacy that of electing the abbot. The re-establishing this
ancient order was the object of several statutes enacted in England

much sooner able to spend the whole of its revenue upon his own
person. During the greater part of the fourteenth and fifteenth

during the course of the fourteenth century, particularly of what
is called the statute of provisors; and of the pragmatic sanction,

centuries, the power of the great barons was, through the greater
part of Europe, in full vigour. But the temporal power of the clergy,

established in France in the fifteenth century. In order to render
the election valid, it was necessary that the sovereign should both

the absolute command which they had once had over the great
body of the people was very much decayed. The power of the

consent to it before hand, and afterwards approve of the person
elected; and though the election was still supposed to be free, he

church was, by that time, very nearly reduced, through the greater
part of Europe, to what arose from their spiritual authority; and

had, however all the indirect means which his situation necessarily afforded him, of influencing the clergy in his own dominions.

even that spiritual authority was much weakened, when it ceased
to be supported by the charity and hospitality of the clergy. The

Other regulations, of a similar tendency, were established in other
parts of Europe. But the power of the pope, in the collation of the

inferior ranks of people no longer looked upon that order as they
had done before; as the comforters of their distress, and the reliev-

great benefices of the church, seems, before the reformation, to
have been nowhere so effectually and so universally restrained as

ers of their indigence. On the contrary, they were provoked and
disgusted by the vanity, luxury, and expense of the richer clergy,

in France and England. The concordat afterwards, in the sixteenth
century, gave to the kings of France the absolute right of present-

who appeared to spend upon their own pleasures what had always
before been regarded as the patrimony of the poor.

ing to all the great, or what are called the consistorial, benefices of
the Gallican church.

In this situation of things, the sovereigns in the different states
of Europe endeavoured to recover the influence which they had

Since the establishment of the pragmatic sanction and of the
concordat, the clergy of France have in general shewn less respect

once had in the disposal of the great benefices of the church; by
procuring to the deans and chapters of each diocese the restora-

to the decrees of the papal court, than the clergy of any other
catholic country. In all the disputes which their sovereign has had

tion of their ancient right of electing the bishop; and to the monks

with the pope, they have almost constantly taken part with the

657

The Wealth of Nations
former. This independency of the clergy of France upon the court
of Rome seems to be principally founded upon the pragmatic sanc-

of Europe. The new doctrines were everywhere received with a
high degree of popular favour. They were propagated with all that

tion and the concordat. In the earlier periods of the monarchy, the
clergy of France appear to have been as much devoted to the pope

enthusiastic zeal which commonly animates the spirit of party,
when it attacks established authority. The teachers of those doc-

as those of any other country. When Robert, the second prince of
the Capetian race, was most unjustly excommunicated by the court

trines, though perhaps, in other respects, not more learned than
many of the divines who defended the established church, seem in

of Rome, his own servants, it is said, threw the victuals which
came from his table to the dogs, and refused to taste any thing

general to have been better acquainted with ecclesiastical history,
and with the origin and progress of that system of opinions upon

themselves which had been polluted by the contact of a person in
his situation. They were taught to do so, it may very safely be

which the authority of the church was established; and they had
thereby the advantage in almost every dispute. The austerity of

presumed, by the clergy of his own dominions.
The claim of collating to the great benefices of the church, a

their manners gave them authority with the common people, who
contrasted the strict regularity of their conduct with the disor-

claim in defence of which the court of Rome had frequently shaken,
and sometimes overturned, the thrones of some of the greatest

derly lives of the greater part of their own clergy. They possessed,
too, in a much higher degree than their adversaries, all the arts of

sovereigns in Christendom, was in this manner either restrained
or modified, or given up altogether, in many different parts of

popularity and of gaining proselytes; arts which the lofty and dignified sons of the church had long neglected, as being to them in

Europe, even before the time of the reformation. As the clergy had
now less influence over the people, so the state had more influence

a great measure useless. The reason of the new doctrines recommended them to some, their novelty to many; the hatred and con-

over the clergy. The clergy, therefore, had both less power, and less
inclination, to disturb the state.

tempt of the established clergy to a still greater number: but the
zealous, passionate, and fanatical, though frequently coarse and

The authority of the church of Rome was in this state of declension, when the disputes which gave birth to the reformation be-

rustic eloquence, with which they were almost everywhere inculcated, recommended them to by far the greatest number.

gan in Germany, and soon spread themselves through every part

The success of the new doctrines was almost everywhere so great,

658

Adam Smith
that the princes, who at that time happened to be on bad terms
with the court of Rome, were, by means of them, easily enabled,

ficient pains to cultivate the friendship of the powerful sovereigns
of France and Spain, of whom the latter was at that time emperor

in their own dominions, to overturn the church, which having
lost the respect and veneration of the inferior ranks of people,

of Germany. With their assistance, it was enabled, though not
without great difficulty, and much bloodshed, either to suppress

could make scarce any resistance. The court of Rome had disobliged
some of the smaller princes in the northern parts of Germany,

altogether, or to obstruct very much, the progress of the reformation in their dominions. It was well enough inclined, too, to be

whom it had probably considered as too insignificant to be worth
the managing. They universally, therefore, established the refor-

complaisant to the king of England. But from the circumstances
of the times, it could not be so without giving offence to a still

mation in their own dominions. The tyranny of Christiern II.,
and of Troll archbishop of Upsal, enabled Gustavus Vasa to expel

greater sovereign, Charles V., king of Spain and emperor of Germany. Henry VIII., accordingly, though he did not embrace him-

them both from Sweden. The pope favoured the tyrant and the
archbishop, and Gustavus Vasa found no difficulty in establishing

self the greater part of the doctrines of the reformation, was yet
enabled, by their general prevalence, to suppress all the monaster-

the reformation in Sweden. Christiern II. was afterwards deposed
from the throne of Denmark, where his conduct had rendered

ies, and to abolish the authority of the church of Rome in his
dominions. That he should go so far, though he went no further,

him as odious as in Sweden. The pope, however, was still disposed
to favour him; and Frederic of Holstein, who had mounted the

gave some satisfaction to the patrons of the reformation, who,
having got possession of the government in the reign of his son

throne in his stead, revenged himself, by following the example of
Gustavus Vasa. The magistrates of Berne and Zurich, who had no

and successor completed, without any difficulty, the work which
Henry VIII. had begun.

particular quarrel with the pope, established with great ease the
reformation in their respective cantons, where just before some of

In some countries, as in Scotland, where the government was
weak, unpopular, and not very firmly established, the reformation

the clergy had, by an imposture somewhat grosser than ordinary,
rendered the whole order both odious and contemptible.

was strong enough to overturn, not only the church, but the state
likewise, for attempting to support the church.

In this critical situation of its affairs the papal court was at suf-

Among the followers of the reformation, dispersed in all the

659

The Wealth of Nations
different countries of Europe, there was no general tribunal, which,
like that of the court of Rome, or an oecumenical council, could

sentation, both in the sovereign and in all other lay patrons. This
system of church government was, from the beginning, favourable

settle all disputes among them, and, with irresistible authority,
prescribe to all of them the precise limits of orthodoxy. When the

to peace and good order, and to submission to the civil sovereign.
It has never, accordingly, been the occasion of any tumult or civil

followers of the reformation in one country, therefore, happened
to differ from their brethren in another, as they had no common

commotion in any country in which it has once been established.
The church of England, in particular, has always valued herself,

judge to appeal to, the dispute could never be decided; and many
such disputes arose among them. Those concerning the govern-

with great reason, upon the unexceptionable loyalty of her principles. Under such a government, the clergy naturally endeavour

ment of the church, and the right of conferring ecclesiastical benefices, were perhaps the most interesting to the peace and welfare

to recommend themselves to the sovereign, to the court, and to
the nobility and gentry of the country, by whose influence they

of civil society. They gave birth, accordingly, to the two principal
parties or sects among the followers of the reformation, the

chiefly expect to obtain preferment. They pay court to those patrons, sometimes, no doubt, by the vilest flattery and assentation;

Lutheran and Calvinistic sects, the only sects among them, of which
the doctrine and discipline have ever yet been established by law

but frequently, too, by cultivating all those arts which best deserve, and which are therefore most likely to gain them, the es-

in any part of Europe.
The followers of Luther, together with what is called the church

teem of people of rank and fortune; by their knowledge in all the
different branches of useful and ornamental learning, by the de-

of England, preserved more or less of the episcopal government,
established subordination among the clergy, gave the sovereign

cent liberality of their manners, by the social good humour of
their conversation, and by their avowed contempt of those absurd

the disposal of all the bishoprics, and other consistorial benefices
within his dominions, and thereby rendered him the real head of

and hypocritical austerities which fanatics inculcate and pretend
to practise, in order to draw upon themselves the veneration, and

the church; and without depriving the bishop of the right of collating to the smaller benefices within his diocese, they, even to

upon the greater part of men of rank and fortune, who avow that
they do not practise them, the abhorrence of the common people.

those benefices, not only admitted, but favoured the right of pre-

Such a clergy, however, while they pay their court in this manner

660

Adam Smith
to the higher ranks of life, are very apt to neglect altogether the
means of maintaining their influence and authority with the lower.

cal candidate. So small a matter as the appointment of a parish
priest, occasioned almost always a violent contest, not only in one

They are listened to, esteemed, and respected by their superiors;
but before their inferiors they are frequently incapable of defend-

parish, but in all the neighbouring parishes who seldom failed to
take part in the quarrel. When the parish happened to be situated

ing, effectually, and to the conviction of such hearers, their own
sober and moderate doctrines, against the most ignorant enthusi-

in a great city, it divided all the inhabitants into two parties; and
when that city happened, either to constitute itself a little repub-

ast who chooses to attack them.
The followers of Zuinglius, or more properly those of Calvin, on

lic, or to be the head and capital of a little republic, as in the case
with many of the considerable cities in Switzerland and Holland,

the contrary, bestowed upon the people of each parish, whenever
the church became vacant, the right of electing their own pastor;

every paltry dispute of this kind, over and above exasperating the
animosity of all their other factions, threatened to leave behind it,

and established, at the same time, the most perfect equality among
the clergy. The former part of this institution, as long as it remained

both a new schism in the church, and a new faction in the state. In
those small republics, therefore, the magistrate very soon found it

in vigour, seems to have been productive of nothing but disorder
and confusion, and to have tended equally to corrupt the morals

necessary, for the sake of preserving the public peace, to assume to
himself the right of presenting to all vacant benefices. In Scotland,

both of the clergy and of the people. The latter part seems never to
have had any effects but what were perfectly agreeable.

the most extensive country in which this presbyterian form of
church government has ever been established, the rights of pa-

As long as the people of each parish preserved the right of electing their own pastors, they acted almost always under the influ-

tronage were in effect abolished by the act which established
presbytery in the beginning of the reign of William III. That act,

ence of the clergy, and generally of the most factious and fanatical
of the order. The clergy, in order to preserve their influence in

at least, put in the power of certain classes of people in each parish
to purchase, for a very small price, the right of electing their own

those popular elections, became, or affected to become, many of
them, fanatics themselves, encouraged fanaticism among the

pastor. The constitution which this act established, was allowed to
subsist for about two-and-twenty years, but was abolished by the

people, and gave the preference almost always to the most fanati-

10th of queen Anne, ch.12, on account of the confusions and

661

The Wealth of Nations
disorders which this more popular mode of election had almost
everywhere occasioned. In so extensive a country as Scotland, how-

authority is perfect; that of benefice is not so. The difference, however, between one benefice and another, is seldom so consider-

ever, a tumult in a remote parish was not so likely to give disturbance to government as in a smaller state. The 10th of queen Anne

able, as commonly to tempt the possessor even of the small one to
pay court to his patron, by the vile arts of flattery and assentation,

restored the rights of patronage. But though, in Scotland, the law
gives the benefice, without any exception to the person presented

in order to get a better. In all the presbyterian churches, where the
rights of patronage are thoroughly established, it is by nobler and

by the patron; yet the church requires sometimes (for she has not
in this respect been very uniform in her decisions) a certain con-

better arts, that the established clergy in general endeavour to gain
the favour of their superiors; by their learning, by the irreproach-

currence of the people, before she will confer upon the presentee
what is called the cure of souls, or the ecclesiastical jurisdiction in

able regularity of their life, and by the faithful and diligent discharge of their duty. Their patrons even frequently complain of

the parish. She sometimes, at least, from an affected concern for
the peace of the parish, delays the settlement till this concurrence

the independency of their spirit, which they are apt to construe
into ingratitude for past favours, but which, at worse, perhaps, is

can be procured. The private tampering of some of the
neighbouring clergy, sometimes to procure, but more frequently

seldom anymore than that indifference which naturally arises from
the consciousness that no further favours of the kind are ever to be

to prevent this concurrence, and the popular arts which they cultivate, in order to enable them upon such occasions to tamper

expected. There is scarce, perhaps, to be found anywhere in Europe, a more learned, decent, independent, and respectable set of

more effectually, are perhaps the causes which principally keep up
whatever remains of the old fanatical spirit, either in the clergy or

men, than the greater part of the presbyterian clergy of Holland,
Geneva, Switzerland, and Scotland.

in the people of Scotland.
The equality which the presbyterian form of church govern-

Where the church benefices are all nearly equal, none of them
can be very great; and this mediocrity of benefice, though it may

ment establishes among the clergy, consists, first, in the equality
of authority or ecclesiastical jurisdiction; and, secondly, in the

be, no doubt, carried too far, has, however, some very agreeable
effects. Nothing but exemplary morals can give dignity to a man

equality of benefice. In all presbyterian churches, the equality of

of small fortune. The vices of levity and vanity necessarily render

662

Adam Smith
him ridiculous, and are, besides, almost as ruinous to him as they
are to the common people. In his own conduct, therefore, he is

men of the country, who, in every country, constitute by far the
most numerous class of men of letters. Where church benefices,

obliged to follow that system of morals which the common people
respect the most. He gains their esteem and affection, by that plan

on the contrary, are many of them very considerable, the church
naturally draws from the universities the greater part of their emi-

of life which his own interest and situation would lead him to
follow. The common people look upon him with that kindness

nent men of letters; who generally find some patron, who does
himself honour by procuring them church preferment. In the

with which we naturally regard one who approaches somewhat to
our own condition, but who, we think, ought to be in a higher.

former situation, we are likely to find the universities filled with
the most eminent men of letters that are to be found in the coun-

Their kindness naturally provokes his kindness. He becomes careful to instruct them, and attentive to assist and relieve them. He

try. In the latter, we are likely to find few eminent men among
them, and those few among the youngest members of the society,

does not even despise the prejudices of people who are disposed to
be so favourable to him, and never treats them with those con-

who are likely, too, to be drained away from it, before they can
have acquired experience and knowledge enough to be of much

temptuous and arrogant airs, which we so often meet with in the
proud dignitaries of opulent and well endowed churches. The

use to it. It is observed by Mr. de Voltaire, that father Porée, a
jesuit of no great eminence in the republic of letters, was the only

presbyterian clergy, accordingly, have more influence over the minds
of the common people, than perhaps the clergy of any other es-

professor they had ever had in France, whose works were worth
the reading. In a country which has produced so many eminent

tablished church. It is, accordingly, in presbyterian countries only,
that we ever find the common people converted, without persecu-

men of letters, it must appear somewhat singular, that scarce one
of them should have been a professor in a university. The famous

tion completely, and almost to a man, to the established church.
In countries where church benefices are, the greater part of them,

Cassendi was, in the beginning of his life, a professor in the university of Aix. Upon the first dawning of his genius, it was repre-

very moderate, a chair in a university is generally a better establishment than a church benefice. The universities have, in this

sented to him, that by going into the church he could easily find a
much more quiet and comfortable subsistence, as well as a better

case, the picking and chusing of their members from all the church-

situation for pursuing his studies; and he immediately followed

663

The Wealth of Nations
the advice. The observation of Mr. de Voltaire may be applied, I
believe, not only to France, but to all other Roman Catholic coun-

true, from the days of Lysias and Isocrates, of Plato and Aristotle,
down to those of Plutarch and Epictetus, Suetonius, and

tries. We very rarely find in any of them an eminent man of letters, who is a professor in a university, except, perhaps, in the

Quintilian. To impose upon any man the necessity of teaching,
year after year, in any particular branch of science seems in reality

professions of law and physic; professions from which the church
is not so likely to draw them. After the church of Rome, that of

to be the most effectual method for rendering him completely
master of it himself. By being obliged to go every year over the

England is by far the richest and best endowed church in
Christendom. In England, accordingly, the church is continually

same ground, if he is good for any thing, he necessarily becomes,
in a few years, well acquainted with every part of it, and if, upon

draining the universities of all their best and ablest members; and
an old college tutor who is known and distinguished in Europe as

any particular point, he should form too hasty an opinion one
year, when he comes, in the course of his lectures to reconsider the

an eminent man of letters, is as rarely to be found there as in any
Roman catholic country, In Geneva, on the contrary, in the prot-

same subject the year thereafter, he is very likely to correct it. As to
be a teacher of science is certainly the natural employment of a

estant cantons of Switzerland, in the protestant countries of Germany, in Holland, in Scotland, in Sweden, and Denmark, the

mere man of letters; so is it likewise, perhaps, the education which
is most likely to render him a man of solid learning and knowl-

most eminent men of letters whom those countries have produced,
have, not all indeed, but the far greater part of them, been profes-

edge. The mediocrity of church benefices naturally tends to draw
the greater part of men of letters in the country where it takes

sors in universities. In those countries, the universities are continually draining the church of all its most eminent men of letters.

place, to the employment in which they can be the most useful to
the public, and at the same time to give them the best education,

It may, perhaps, be worth while to remark, that, if we except the
poets, a few orators, and a few historians, the far greater part of

perhaps, they are capable of receiving. It tends to render their learning both as solid as possible, and as useful as possible.

the other eminent men of letters, both of Greece and Rome, appear to have been either public or private teachers; generally either

The revenue of every established church, such parts of it excepted
as may arise from particular lands or manors, is a branch, it ought

of philosophy or of rhetoric. This remark will be found to hold

to be observed, of the general revenue of the state, which is thus

664

Adam Smith
diverted to a purpose very different from the defence of the state.
The tithe, for example, is a real land tax, which puts it out of the

Great Britain. What may be the amount of the whole expense which
the church, either of Berne, or of any other protestant canton, costs

power of the proprietors of land to contribute so largely towards the
defence of the state as they otherwise might be able to do. The rent

the state, I do not pretend to know. By a very exact account it appears, that, in 1755, the whole revenue of the clergy of the church

of land, however, is, according to some, the sole fund; and, according to others, the principal fund, from which, in all great monar-

of Scotland, including their glebe or church lands, and the rent of
their manses or dwelling-houses, estimated according to a reason-

chies, the exigencies of the state must be ultimately supplied. The
more of this fund that is given to the church, the less, it is evident,

able valuation, amounted only to £68,514:1:5 1/12d. This very
moderate revenue affords a decent subsistence to nine hundred and

can be spared to the state. It may be laid down as a certain maxim,
that all other things being supposed equal, the richer the church,

fortyfour ministers. The whole expense of the church, including
what is occasionally laid out for the building and reparation of

the poorer must necessarily be, either the sovereign on the one hand,
or the people on the other; and, in all cases, the less able must the

churches, and of the manses of ministers, cannot well be supposed
to exceed eighty or eighty-five thousand pounds a-year. The most

state be to defend itself. In several protestant countries, particularly
in all the protestant cantons of Switzerland, the revenue which an-

opulent church in Christendom does not maintain better the uniformity of faith, the fervour of devotion, the spirit of order, regular-

ciently belonged to the Roman catholic church, the tithes and church
lands, has been found a fund sufficient, not only to afford compe-

ity, and austere morals, in the great body of the people, than this
very poorly endowed church of Scotland. All the good effects, both

tent salaries to the established clergy, but to defray, with little or no
addition, all the other expenses of the state. The magistrates of the

civil and religious, which an established church can be supposed to
produce, are produced by it as completely as by any other. The

powerful canton of Berne, in particular, have accumulated, out of
the savings from this fund, a very large sum, supposed to amount to

greater part of the protestant churches of Switzerland, which, in
general, are not better endowed than the church of Scotland, pro-

several millions; part or which is deposited in a public treasure, and
part is placed at interest in what are called the public funds of the

duce those effects in a still higher degree. In the greater part of the
protestant cantons, there is not a single person to be found, who

different indebted nations of Europe; chiefly in those of France and

does not profess himself to be of the established church. If he pro-

665

The Wealth of Nations
fesses himself to be of any other, indeed, the law obliges him to leave
the canton. But so severe, or, rather, indeed, so oppressive a law,

PART IV

could never have been executed in such free countries, had not the
diligence of the clergy beforehand converted to the established church

Of the Expense of supporting the Dignity of the Sovereign

the whole body of the people, with the exception of, perhaps, a few
individuals only. In some parts of Switzerland, accordingly, where,

OVER AND ABOVE the expenses necessary for enabling the sovereign
to perform his several duties, a certain expense is requisite for the

from the accidental union of a protestant and Roman catholic country, the conversion has not been so complete, both religions are not

support of his dignity. This expense varies, both with the different
periods of improvement, and with the different forms of govern-

only tolerated, but established by law.
The proper performance of every service seems to require, that

ment.
In an opulent and improved society, where all the different or-

its pay or recompence should be, as exactly as possible, proportioned to the nature of the service. If any service is very much

ders of people are growing every day more expensive in their houses,
in their furniture, in their tables, in their dress, and in their equi-

underpaid, it is very apt to suffer by the meanness and incapacity
of the greater part of those who are employed in it. If it is very

page; it cannot well be expected that the sovereign should alone
hold out against the fashion. He naturally, therefore, or rather

much overpaid, it is apt to suffer, perhaps still more, by their negligence and idleness. A man of a large revenue, whatever may be

necessarily, becomes more expensive in all those different articles
too. His dignity even seems to require that he should become so.

his profession, thinks he ought to live like other men of large revenues; and to spend a great part of his time in festivity, in vanity,

As, in point of dignity, a monarch is more raised above his subjects than the chief magistrate of any republic is ever supposed to

and in dissipation. But in a clergyman, this train of life not only
consumes the time which ought to be employed in the duties of

be above his fellow-citizens; so a greater expense is necessary for
supporting that higher dignity. We naturally expect more splendour

his function, but in the eyes of the common people, destroys almost entirely that sanctity of character, which can alone enable

in the court of a king, than in the mansion-house of a doge or
burgo-master.

him to perform those duties with proper weight and authority.

666

Adam Smith
CONCLUSION

themselves any estate or fund sufficient for paying those fees.
Those local or provincial expenses, of which the benefit is local

THE EXPENSE of defending the society, and that of supporting the
dignity of the chief magistrate, are both laid out for the general

or provincial (what is laid out, for example, upon the police of a
particular town or district), ought to be defrayed by a local or

benefit of the whole society. It is reasonable, therefore, that they
should be defrayed by the general contribution of the whole soci-

provincial revenue, and ought to be no burden upon the general
revenue of the society. It is unjust that the whole society should

ety; all the different members contributing, as nearly as possible,
in proportion to their respective abilities.

contribute towards an expense, of which the benefit is confined to
a part of the society.

The expense of the administration of justice, too, may no doubt
be considered as laid out for the benefit of the whole society. There

The expense of maintaining good roads and communications
is, no doubt, beneficial to the whole society, and may, therefore,

is no impropriety, therefore, in its being defrayed by the general
contribution of the whole society. The persons, however, who give

without any injustice, be defrayed by the general contributions of
the whole society. This expense, however, is most immediately and

occasion to this expense, are those who, by their injustice in one
way or another, make it necessary to seek redress or protection

directly beneficial to those who travel or carry goods from one
place to another, and to those who consume such goods. The turn-

from the courts of justice. The persons, again, most immediately
benefited by this expense, are those whom the courts of justice

pike tolls in England, and the duties called peages in other countries, lay it altogether upon those two different sets of people, and

either restore to their rights, or maintain in their rights. The expense of the administration of justice, therefore, may very prop-

thereby discharge the general revenue of the society from a very
considerable burden.

erly be defrayed by the particular contribution of one or other, or
both, of those two different sets of persons, according as different

The expense of the institutions for education and religious instruction, is likewise, no doubt, beneficial to the whole society,

occasions may require, that is, by the fees of court. It cannot be
necessary to have recourse to the general contribution of the whole

and may, therefore, without injustice, be defrayed by the general
contribution of the whole society. This expense, however, might,

society, except for the conviction of those criminals who have not

perhaps, with equal propriety, and even with some advantage, be

667

The Wealth of Nations
defrayed altogether by those who receive the immediate benefit of
such education and instruction, or by the voluntary contribution

CHAPTER II

of those who think they have occasion for either the one or the
other.

OF THE SOURCES OF THE GENERAL OR
PUBLIC REVENUE OF THE SOCIETY

When the institutions, or public works, which are beneficial to
the whole society, either cannot be maintained altogether, or are

THE REVENUE which must defray, not only the expense of defend-

not maintained altogether, by the contribution of such particular
members of the society as are most immediately benefited by them;

ing the society and of supporting the dignity of the chief magistrate, but all the other necessary expenses of government, for which

the deficiency must, in most cases, be made up by the general
contribution of the whole society. The general revenue of the soci-

the constitution of the state has not provided any particular revenue may be drawn, either, first, from some fund which peculiarly

ety, over and above defraying the expense of defending the society,
and of supporting the dignity of the chief magistrate, must make

belongs to the sovereign or commonwealth, and which is independent of the revenue of the people; or, secondly, from the rev-

up for the deficiency of many particular branches of revenue. The
sources of this general or public revenue, I shall endeavour to ex-

enue of the people.

plain in the following chapter.
PART I
Of the Funds, or Sources, of Revenue, which may peculiarly
belong to the Sovereign or Commonwealth
THE FUNDS, or sources, of revenue, which may peculiarly belong
to the sovereign or commonwealth, must consist, either in stock,
or in land.

668

Adam Smith
The sovereign, like, any other owner of stock, may derive a revenue from it, either by employing it himself, or by lending it. His

great, of which the sovereign has leisure to carry on the trade of a
wine-merchant or an apothecary. The profit of a public bank has

revenue is, in the one case, profit, in the other interest.
The revenue of a Tartar or Arabian chief consists in profit. It

been a source of revenue to more considerable states. It has been
so, not only to Hamhurgh, but to Venice and Amsterdam. A rev-

arises principally from the milk and increase of his own herds and
flocks, of which he himself superintends the management, and is

enue of this kind has even by some people been thought not below the attention of so great an empire as that of Great Britain.

the principal shepherd or herdsman of his own horde or tribe. It
is, however, in this earliest and rudest state of civil government

Reckoning the ordinary dividend of the bank of England at five
and a-half per cent., and its capital at ten millions seven hundred

only, that profit has ever made the principal part of the public
revenue of a monarchical state.

and eighty thousand pounds, the neat annual profit, after paying
the expense of management, must amount, it is said, to five hun-

Small republics have sometimes derived a considerable revenue
from the profit of mercantile projects. The republic of Hamburgh

dred and ninety-two thousand nine hundred pounds. Government, it is pretended, could borrow this capital at three per cent.

is said to do so from the profits of a public wine-cellar and
apothecary’s shop. {See Memoires concernant les Droits et Impo-

interest, and, by taking the management of the bank into its own
hands, might make a clear profit of two hundred and sixty-nine

sitions en Europe, tome i. page 73. This work was compiled by
the order of the court, for the use of a commission employed for

thousand five hundred pounds a-year. The orderly, vigilant, and
parsimonious administration of such aristocracies as those of Venice

some years past in considering the proper means for reforming
the finances of France. The account of the French taxes, which

and Amsterdam, is extremely proper, it appears from experience,
for the management of a mercantile project of this kind. But

takes up three volumes in quarto, may be regarded as perfectly
authentic. That of those of other European nations was compiled

whether such a government us that of England, which, whatever
may be its virtues, has never been famous for good economy; which,

from such information as the French ministers at the different
courts could procure. It is much shorter, and probably not quite

in time of peace, has generally conducted itself with the slothful
and negligent profusion that is, perhaps, natural to monarchies;

so exact as that of the French taxes.} That state cannot be very

and, in time of war, has constantly acted with all the thoughtless

669

The Wealth of Nations
extravagance that democracies are apt to fall into, could be safely
trusted with the management of such a project, must at least be a

was thus, as we are told by Machiavel, that the agents of Lorenzo
of Medicis, not a prince of mean abilities, carried on his trade.

good deal more doubtful.
The post-office is properly a mercantile project. The govern-

The republic of Florence was several times obliged to pay the debt
into which their extravagance had involved him. He found it con-

ment advances the expense of establishing the different offices,
and of buying or hiring the necessary horses or carriages, and is

venient, accordingly to give up the business of merchant, the business to which his family had originally owed their fortune, and, in

repaid, with a large profit, by the duties upon what is carried. It is,
perhaps, the only mercantile project which has been successfully

the latter part of his life, to employ both what remained of that
fortune, and the revenue of the state, of which he had the dis-

managed by, I believe, every sort of government. The capital to be
advanced is not very considerable. There is no mystery in the busi-

posal, in projects and expenses more suitable to his station.
No two characters seem more inconsistent than those of trader

ness. The returns are not only certain but immediate.
Princes, however, have frequently engaged in many other mer-

and sovereign. If the trading spirit of the English East India company renders them very bad sovereigns, the spirit of sovereignty

cantile projects, and have been willing, like private persons, to
mend their fortunes, by becoming adventurers in the common

seems to have rendered them equally bad traders. While they were
traders only, they managed their trade successfully, and were able

branches of trade. They have scarce ever succeeded. The profusion
with which the affairs of princes are always managed, renders it

to pay from their profits a moderate dividend to the proprietors of
their stock. Since they became sovereigns, with a revenue which,

almost impossible that they should. The agents of a prince regard
the wealth of their master as inexhaustible; are careless at what

it is said, was originally more than three millions sterling, they
have been obliged to beg the ordinary assistance of government,

price they buy, are careless at what price they sell, are careless at
what expense they transport his goods from one place to another.

in order to avoid immediate bankruptcy. In their former situation, their servants in India considered themselves as the clerks of

Those agents frequently live with the profusion of princes; and
sometimes, too, in spite of that profusion, and by a proper method

merchants; in their present situation, those servants consider themselves as the ministers of sovereigns.

of making up their accounts, acquire the fortunes of princes. It

A state may sometimes derive some part of its public revenue

670

Adam Smith
from the interest of money, as well as from the profits of stock. If
it has amassed a treasure, it may lend a part of that treasure, either

sure, invented a method of lending, not money, indeed, but what
is equivalent to money, to its subjects. By advancing to private

to foreign states, or to its own subjects.
The canton of Berne derives a considerable revenue by lending

people, at interest, and upon land security to double the value,
paper bills of credit, to be redeemed fifteen years after their date;

a part of its treasure to foreign states, that is, by placing it in the
public funds of the different indebted nations of Europe, chiefly

and, in the mean time, made transferable from hand to hand, like
banknotes, and declared by act of assembly to be a legal tender in

in those of France and England. The security of this revenue must
depend, first, upon the security of the funds in which it is placed,

all payments from one inhabitant of the province to another, it
raised a moderate revenue, which went a considerable way to-

or upon the good faith of the government which has the management of them; and, secondly, upon the certainty or probability of

wards defraying an annual expense of about £4,500, the whole
ordinary expense of that frugal and orderly government. The suc-

the continuance of peace with the debtor nation. In the case of a
war, the very first act of hostility on the part of the debtor nation

cess of an expedient of this kind must have depended upon three
different circumstances: first, upon the demand for some other

might be the forfeiture of the funds of its credit or. This policy of
lending money to foreign states is, so far as I know peculiar to the

instrument of commerce, besides gold and silver money, or upon
the demand for such a quantity of consumable stock as could not

canton of Berne.
The city of Hamburgh {See Memoire concernant les Droites et

be had without sending abroad the greater part of their gold and
silver money, in order to purchase it; secondly, upon the good

Impositions en Europe tome i p. 73.}has established a sort of public pawn-shop, which lends money to the subjects of the state,

credit of the government which made use of this expedient; and,
thirdly, upon the moderation with which it was used, the whole

upon pledges, at six per cent. interest. This pawn-shop, or lombard,
as it is called, affords a revenue, it is pretended, to the state, of a

value of the paper bills of credit never exceeding that of the gold
and silver money which would have been necessary for carrying

hundred and fifty thousand crowns, which, at four and sixpence
the crown, amounts to £33,750 sterling.

on their circulation, had there been no paper bills of credit. The
same expedient was, upon different occasions, adopted by several

The government of Pennsylvania, without amassing any trea-

other American colonies; but, from want of this moderation, it

671

The Wealth of Nations
produced, in the greater part of them, much more disorder than
conveniency.

circumstances, therefore, could occasion any very considerable expense to the state. The rent of a very moderate landed estate might

The unstable and perishable nature of stock and credit, however, renders them unfit to be trusted to as the principal funds of

be fully sufficient for defraying all the other necessary expenses of
government.

that sure, steady, and permanent revenue, which can alone give
security and dignity to government. The government of no great

In the ancient monarchies of Europe, the manners and customs
of the time sufficiently prepared the great body of the people for

nation, that was advanced beyond the shepherd state, seems ever
to have derived the greater part of its public revenue from such

war; and when they took the field, they were, by the condition of
their feudal tenures, to be maintained either at their own expense,

sources.
Land is a fund of more stable and permanent nature; and the

or at that of their immediate lords, without bringing any new
charge upon the sovereign. The other expenses of government were,

rent of public lands, accordingly, has been the principal source of
the public revenue of many a great nation that was much advanced

the greater part of them, very moderate. The administration of
justice, it has been shewn, instead of being a cause of expense was

beyond the shepherd state. From the produce or rent of the public
lands, the ancient republics of Greece and Italy derived for a long

a source of revenue. The labour of the country people, for three
days before, and for three days after, harvest, was thought a fund

the the greater part of that revenue which defrayed the necessary
expenses of the commonwealth. The rent of the crown lands con-

sufficient for making and maintaining all the bridges, highways,
and other public works, which the commerce of the country was

stituted for a long time the greater part of the revenue of the ancient sovereigns of Europe.

supposed to require. In those days the principal expense of the
sovereign seems to have consisted in the maintenance of his own

War, and the preparation for war, are the two circumstances
which, in modern times, occasion the greater part of the necessary

family and household. The officers of his household, accordingly,
were then the great officers of state. The lord treasurer received his

expense or all great states. But in the ancient republics of Greece
and Italy, every citizen was a soldier, and both served, and pre-

rents. The lord steward and lord chamberlain looked after the expense of his family. The care of his stables was committed to the

pared himself for service, at his own expense. Neither of those two

lord constable and the lord marshal. His houses were all built in

672

Adam Smith
the form of castles, and seem to have been the principal fortresses
which he possessed. The keepers of those houses or castles might

from the rent of houses and the interest of capital stock. The land
tax of the city of London, for example, at four shillings in the

be considered as a sort of military governors. They seem to have
been the only military officers whom it was necessary to maintain

pound, amounts to £123,399: 6: 7; that of the city of Westminster
to £63,092: 1: 5; that of the palaces of Whitehall and St. James’s,

in time of peace. In these circumstances, the rent of a great landed
estate might, upon ordinary occasions, very well defray all the

to £30,754: 6: 3. A certain proportion of the land tax is, in the
same manner, assessed upon all the other cities and towns corpo-

necessary expenses of government.
In the present state of the greater part of the civilized monar-

rate in the kingdom; and arises almost altogether, either from the
rent of houses, or from what is supposed to be the interest of

chies of Europe, the rent of all the lands in the country, managed
as they probably would be, if they all belonged to one proprietor,

trading and capital stock. According to the estimation, therefore,
by which Great Britain is rated to the land tax, the whole mass of

would scarce, perhaps, amount to the ordinary revenue which they
levy upon the people even in peaceable times. The ordinary rev-

revenue arising from the rent of all the lands, from that of all the
houses, and from the interest of all the capital stock, that part of it

enue of Great Britain, for example, including not only what is
necessary for defraying the current expense of the year, but for

only excepted which is either lent to the public, or employed in
the cultivation of land, does not exceed ten millions sterling a-

paying the interest of the public debts, and for sinking a part of
the capital of those debts, amounts to upwards of ten millions a-

year, the ordinary revenue which government levies upon the
people, even in peaceable times. The estimation by which Great

year. But the land tax, at four shillings in the pound, falls short of
two millions a-year. This land tax, as it is called however, is sup-

Britain is rated to the land tax is, no doubt, taking the whole
kingdom at an average, very much below the real value; though in

posed to be one-fifth, not only of the rent of all the land, but of
that of all the houses, and of the interest of all the capital stock of

several particular counties and districts it is said to be nearly equal
to that value. The rent of the lands alone, exclusive of that of

Great Britain, that part of it only excepted which is either lent to
the public, or employed as farming stock in the cultivation of

houses and of the interest of stock, has by many people been estimated at twenty millions; an estimation made in a great measure

land. A very considerable part of the produce of this tax arises

at random, and which, I apprehend, is as likely to be above as

673

The Wealth of Nations
below the truth. But if the lands of Great Britain, in the present
state of their cultivation, do not afford a rent of more than twenty

afford a rent of twenty millions; the rent being, in both cases,
supposed a third part of the produce, the revenue of the propri-

millions a-year, they could not well afford the half, most probably
not the fourth part of that rent, if they all belonged to a single

etors would be less than it otherwise might be, by ten millions ayear only; but the revenue of the great hotly of the people would

proprietor, and were put under the negligent, expensive, and oppressive management of his factors and agents. The crown lands

be less than it otherwise might be, by thirty millions a-year, deducting only what would be necessary for seed. The population of

of Great Britain do not at present afford the fourth part of the
rent which could probably be drawn from them if they were the

the country would be less by the number of people which thirty
millions a-year, deducting always the seed, could maintain, ac-

property of private persons. If the crown lands were more extensive, it is probable, they would be still worse managed.

cording to the particular mode of living, and expense which might
take place in the different ranks of men, among whom the re-

The revenue which the great body of the people derives from
land is, in proportion, not to the rent, but to the produce of the

mainder was distributed.
Though there is not at present in Europe, any civilized state of

land. The whole annual produce of the land of every country, if
we except what is reserved for seed, is either annually consumed

any kind which derives the greater part of its public revenue from
the rent of lands which are the property of the state; yet, in all the

by the great body of the people, or exchanged for something else
that is consumed by them. Whatever keeps down the produce of

great monarchies of Europe, there are still many large tracts of
land which belong to the crown. They are generally forest, and

the land below what it would otherwise rise to, keeps down the
revenue of the great body of the people, still more than it does

sometimes forests where, after travelling several miles, you will
scarce find a single tree; a mere waste and loss of country, in re-

that of the proprietors of land. The rent of land, that portion of
the produce which belongs to the proprietors, is scarce anywhere

spect both of produce and population. In every great monarchy of
Europe, the sale of the crown lands would produce a very large

in Great Britain supposed to be more than a third part of the
whole produce. If the land which, in one state of cultivation, af-

sum of money, which, if applied to the payment of the public
debts, would deliver from mortgage a much greater revenue than

fords a revenue of ten millions sterling a-year, would in another

any which those lands have even afforded to the crown. In coun-

674

Adam Smith
tries where lands, improved and cultivated very highly, and yielding, at the time of sale, as great a rent as can easily be got from

Lands, for the purposes of pleasure and magnificence, parks,
gardens, public walks, etc. possessions which are everywhere con-

them, commonly sell at thirty years purchase; the unimproved,
uncultivated, and low-rented crown lands, might well be expected

sidered as causes of expense, not as sources of revenue, seem to be
the only lands which, in a great and civilized monarchy, ought to

to sell at forty, fifty, or sixty years purchase. The crown might
immediately enjoy the revenue which this great price would re-

belong to the crown.
Public stock and public lands, therefore, the two sources of rev-

deem from mortgage. In the course of a few years, it would probably enjoy another revenue. When the crown lands had become

enue which may peculiarly belong to the sovereign or commonwealth, being both improper and insufficient funds for defraying

private property, they would, in the course of a few years, become
well improved and well cultivated. The increase of their produce

the necessary expense of any great and civilized state; it remains
that this expense must, the greater part of it, be defrayed by taxes

would increase the population of the country, by augmenting the
revenue and consumption of the people. But the revenue which

of one kind or another; the people contributing a part of their
own private revenue, in order to make up a public revenue to the

the crown derives from the duties or custom and excise, would
necessarily increase with the revenue and consumption of the

sovereign or commonwealth.

people.
The revenue which, in any civilized monarchy, the crown derives from the crown lands, though it appears to cost nothing to
individuals, in reality costs more to the society than perhaps any
other equal revenue which the crown enjoys. It would, in all cases,
be for the interest of the society, to replace this revenue to the
crown by some other equal revenue, and to divide the lands among
the people, which could not well be done better, perhaps, than by
exposing them to public sale.

675

The Wealth of Nations
PART II

1. The subjects of every state ought to contribute towards the support of the government, as nearly as possible, in proportion to

Of Taxes

their respective abilities; that is, in proportion to the revenue which
they respectively enjoy under the protection of the state. The ex-

THE PRIVATE REVENUE OF INDIVIDUALS, it has been shown in the
first book of this Inquiry, arises, ultimately from three different

pense of government to the individuals of a great nation, is like
the expense of management to the joint tenants of a great estate,

sources; rent, profit, and wages. Every tax must finally be paid
from some one or other of those three different sources of rev-

who are all obliged to contribute in proportion to their respective
interests in the estate. In the observation or neglect of this maxim,

enue, or from all of them indifferently. I shall endeavour to give
the best account I can, first, of those taxes which, it is intended

consists what is called the equality or inequality of taxation. Every
tax, it must be observed once for all, which falls finally upon one

should fall upon rent; secondly, of those which, it is intended should
fall upon profit; thirdly, of those which, it is intended should fall

only of the three sorts of revenue above mentioned, is necessarily
unequal, in so far as it does not affect the other two. In the follow-

upon wages; and fourthly, of those which, it is intended should
fall indifferently upon all those three different sources of private

ing examination of different taxes, I shall seldom take much farther notice of this sort of inequality; but shall, in most cases, con-

revenue. The particular consideration of each of these four different sorts of taxes will divide the second part of the present chapter

fine my observations to that inequality which is occasioned by a
particular tax falling unequally upon that particular sort of pri-

into four articles, three of which will require several other subdivisions. Many of these taxes, it will appear from the following re-

vate revenue which is affected by it.

view, are not finally paid from the fund, or source of revenue,
upon which it is intended they should fall.

2. The tax which each individual is bound to pay, ought to be
certain and not arbitrary. The time of payment, the manner of

Before I enter upon the examination of particular taxes,it is necessary to premise the four following maximis with regard to taxes

payment, the quantity to be paid, ought all to be clear and plain
to the contributor, and to every other person. Where it is other-

in general.

wise, every person subject to the tax is put more or less in the

676

Adam Smith
power of the tax-gatherer, who can either aggravate the tax upon
any obnoxious contributor, or extort, by the terror of such aggra-

4. Every tax ought to be so contrived, as both to take out and to
keep out of the pockets of the people as little as possible, over and

vation, some present or perquisite to himself. The uncertainty of
taxation encourages the insolence, and favours the corruption, of

above what it brings into the public treasury of the state. A tax
may either take out or keep out of the pockets of the people a

an order of men who are naturally unpopular, even where they are
neither insolent nor corrupt. The certainty of what each individual

great deal more than it brings into the public treasury, in the four
following ways. First, the levying of it may require a great number

ought to pay is, in taxation, a matter of so great importance, that
a very considerable degree of inequality, it appears, I believe, from

of officers, whose salaries may eat up the greater part of the produce of the tax, and whose perquisites may impose another addi-

the experience of all nations, is not near so great an evil as a very
small degree of uncertainty.

tional tax upon the people. Secondly, it may obstruct the industry
of the people, and discourage them from applying to certain

3. Every tax ought to be levied at the time, or in the manner, in

branches of business which might give maintenance and employment to great multitudes. While it obliges the people to pay, it

which it is most likely to be convenient for the contributor to pay
it. A tax upon the rent of land or of houses, payable at the same

may thus diminish, or perhaps destroy, some of the funds which
might enable them more easily to do so. Thirdly, by the forfeitures

term at which such rents are usually paid, is levied at the time
when it is most likely to be convenient for the contributor to pay;

and other penalties which those unfortunate individuals incur,
who attempt unsuccessfully to evade the tax, it may frequently

or when he is most likely to have wherewithall to pay. Taxes upon
such consumable goods as are articles of luxury, are all finally paid

ruin them, and thereby put an end to the benefit which the community might have received from the employment of their capi-

by the consumer, and generally in a manner that is very convenient for him. He pays them by little and little, as he has occasion

tals. An injudicious tax offers a great temptation to smuggling.
But the penalties of smuggling must arise in proportion to the

to buy the goods. As he is at liberty too, either to buy or not to
buy, as he pleases, it must be his own fault if he ever suffers any

temptation. The law, contrary to all the ordinary principles of
justice, first creates the temptation, and then punishes those who

considerable inconveniency from such taxes.

yield to it; and it commonly enhances the punishment, too, in

677

The Wealth of Nations
proportion to the very circumstance which ought certainly to alleviate it, the temptation to commit the crime. {See Sketches of

ARTICLE I. — Taxes upon Rent — Taxes upon the Rent of
Land.

the History of Man page 474, and Seq.} Fourthly, by subjecting
the people to the frequent visits and the odious examination of

A tax upon the rent of land may either be imposed according to
a certain canon, every district being valued at a curtain rent, which

the tax-gatherers, it may expose them to much unnecessary trouble,
vexation, and oppression; and though vexation is not, strictly speak-

valuation is not afterwards to be altered; or it may be imposed in
such a manner, as to vary with every variation in the real rent of

ing, expense, it is certainly equivalent to the expense at which
every man would be willing to redeem himself from it. It is in

the land, and to rise or fall with the improvement or declension of
its cultivation.

some one or other of these four different ways, that taxes are frequently so much more burdensome to the people than they are

A land tax which, like that of Great Britain, is assessed upon each
district according to a certain invariable canon, though it should be

beneficial to the sovereign.

equal at the time of its first establishment, necessarily becomes unequal in process of time, according to the unequal degrees of im-

The evident justice and utility of the foregoing maxims have
recommended them, more or less, to the attention of all nations.

provement or neglect in the cultivation of the different parts of the
country. In England, the valuation, according to which the differ-

All nations have endeavoured, to the best of their judgment, to
render their taxes as equal as they could contrive; as certain, as

ent counties and parishes were assessed to the land tax by the 4th of
William and Mary, was very unequal even at its first establishment.

convenient to the contributor, both the time and the mode of
payment, and in proportion to the revenue which they brought to

This tax, therefore, so far offends against the first of the four maxims above mentioned. It is perfectly agreeable to the other three. It

the prince, as little burdensome to the people. The following short
review of some of the principal taxes which have taken place in

is perfectly certain. The time of payment for the tax, being the same
as that for the rent, is as convenient as it can be to the contributor.

different ages and countries, will show, that the endeavours of all
nations have not in this respect been equally successful.

Though the landlord is, in all cases, the real contributor, the tax is
commonly advanced by the tenant, to whom the landlord is obliged
to allow it in the payment of the rent. This tax is levied by a much

678

Adam Smith
smaller number of officers than any other which affords nearly the
same revenue. As the tax upon each district does not rise with the

between the tax which they would have paid, according to the
present rent of their estates, and that which they actually pay ac-

rise of the rent, the sovereign does not share in the profits of the
landlord’s improvements. Those improvements sometimes contrib-

cording to the ancient valuation. Had the state of the country
been different, had rents been gradually falling in consequence of

ute, indeed, to the discharge of the other landlords of the district.
But the aggravation of the tax, which this may sometimes occasion

the declension of cultivation, the landlords would almost all have
lost this difference. In the state of things which has happened to

upon a particular estate, is always so very small, that it never can
discourage those improvements, nor keep down the produce of the

take place since the revolution, the constancy of the valuation has
been advantageous to the landlord and hurtful to the sovereign.

land below what it would otherwise rise to. As it has no tendency to
diminish the quantity, it can have none to raise the price of that

In a different state of things it might have been advantageous to
the sovereign and hurtful to the landlord.

produce. It does not obstruct the industry of the people; it subjects
the landlord to no other inconveniency besides the unavoidable one

As the tax is made payable in money, so the valuation of the
land is expressed in money. Since the establishment of this valua-

of paying the tax.
The advantage, however, which the land-lord has derived from

tion, the value of silver has been pretty uniform, and there has
been no alteration in the standard of the coin, either as to weight

the invariable constancy of the valuation, by which all the lands
of Great Britain are rated to the land-tax, has been principally

or fineness. Had silver risen considerably in its value, as it seems to
have done in the course of the two centuries which preceded the

owing to some circumstances altogether extraneous to the nature of the tax.

discovery of the mines of America, the constancy of the valuation
might have proved very oppressive to the landlord. Had silver fallen

It has been owing in part, to the great prosperity of almost every
part of the country, the rents of almost all the estates of Great

considerably in its value, as it certainly did for about a century at
least after the discovery of those mines, the same constancy of

Britain having, since the time when this valuation was first established, been continually rising, and scarce any of them having fallen.

valuation would have reduced very much this branch of the revenue of the sovereign. Had any considerable alteration been made

The landlords, therefore, have almost all gained the difference

in the standard of the money, either by sinking the same quantity

679

The Wealth of Nations
of silver to a lower denomination, or by raising it to a higher; had
an ounce of silver, for example, instead of being coined into five

equitable of all taxes. All taxes, they pretend, fall ultimately upon
the rent of land, and ought, therefore, to be imposed equally upon

shillings and two pence, been coined either into pieces which bore
so low a denomination as two shillings and seven pence, or into

the fund which must finally pay them. That all taxes ought to fall
as equally as possible upon the fund which must finally pay them,

pieces which bore so high a one as ten shillings and four pence, it
would, in the one case, have hurt the revenue of the proprietor, in

is certainly true. But without entering into the disagreeable discussion of the metaphysical arguments by which they support their

the other that of the sovereign.
In circumstances, therefore, somewhat different from those

very ingenious theory, it will sufficiently appear, from the following review, what are the taxes which fall finally upon the rent of

which have actually taken place, this constancy of valuation might
have been a very great inconveniency, either to the contributors or

the land, and what are those which fall finally upon some other
fund.

to the commonwealth. In the course of ages, such circumstances,
however, must at some time or other happen. But though em-

In the Venetian territory, all the arable lands which are given in
lease to farmers are taxed at a tenth of the rent. {Memoires

pires, like all the other works of men, have all hitherto proved
mortal, yet every empire aims at immortality. Every constitution,

concernant les Droits, p. 240, 241.} The leases are recorded in a
public register, which is kept by the officers of revenue in each

therefore, which it is meant should be as permanent as the empire
itself, ought to be convenient, not in certain circumstances only,

province or district. When the proprietor cultivates his own lands,
they are valued according to an equitable estimation, and he is

but in all circumstances; or ought to be suited, not to those circumstances which are transitory, occasional, or accidental, but to

allowed a deduction of one-fifth of the tax; so that for such land
he pays only eight instead of ten per cent. of the supposed rent.

those which are necessary, and therefore always the same.
A tax upon the rent of land, which varies with every variation of

A land-tax of this kind is certainly more equal than the land-tax
of England. It might not, perhaps, be altogether so certain, and

the rent, or which rises and falls according to the improvement or
neglect of cultivation, is recommended by that sect of men of

the assessment of the tax might frequently occasion a good deal
more trouble to the landlord. It might, too, be a good deal more

letters in France, who call themselves the economists, as the most

expensive in the levying.

680

Adam Smith
Such a system of administration, however, might, perhaps, be
contrived, as would in a great measure both prevent this uncer-

tant part of the revenue of the community. By rendering the tax
upon such fines a good deal heavier than upon the ordinary rent,

tainty, and moderate this expense.
The landlord and tenant, for example, might jointly be obliged

this hurtful practice might be discouraged, to the no small advantage of all the different parties concerned, of the landlord, of the

to record their lease in a public register. Proper penalties might be
enacted against concealing or misrepresenting any of the condi-

tenant, of the sovereign, and of the whole community.
Some leases prescribe to the tenant a certain mode of cultiva-

tions; and if part of those penalties were to be paid to either of the
two parties who informed against and convicted the other of such

tion, and a certain succession of crops, during the whole continuance of the lease. This condition, which is generally the effect of

concealment or misrepresentation, it would effectually deter them
from combining together in order to defraud the public revenue.

the landlord’s conceit of his own superior knowledge (a conceit in
most cases very ill-founded), ought always to be considered as an

All the conditions of the lease might be sufficiently known from
such a record.

additional rent, as a rent in service, instead of a rent in money. In
order to discourage the practice, which is generally a foolish one,

Some landlords, instead of raising the rent, take a fine for the
renewal of the lease. This practice is, in most cases, the expedient

this species of rent might be valued rather high, and consequently
taxed somewhat higher than common money-rents.

of a spendthrift, who, for a sum of ready money sells a future
revenue of much greater value. It is, in most cases, therefore, hurt-

Some landlords, instead of a rent in money, require a rent in
kind, in corn, cattle, poultry, wine, oil, etc.; others, again, require

ful to the landlord; it is frequently hurtful to the tenant; and it is
always hurtful to the community. It frequently takes from the ten-

a rent in service. Such rents are always more hurtful to the tenant
than beneficial to the landlord. They either take more, or keep

ant so great a part of his capital, and thereby diminishes so much
his ability to cultivate the land, that he finds it more difficult to

more out of the pocket of the former, than they put into that of
the latter. In every country where they take place, the tenants are

pay a small rent than it would otherwise have been to pay a great
one. Whatever diminishes his ability to cultivate, necessarily keeps

poor and beggarly, pretty much according to the degree in which
they take place. By valuing, in the same manner, such rents rather

down, below what it would otherwise have been, the most impor-

high, and consequently taxing them somewhat higher than com-

681

The Wealth of Nations
mon money-rents, a practice which is hurtful to the whole community, might, perhaps, be sufficiently discouraged.

land, to the diminution, not only of the revenue of their masters,
but of the most important part of that of the whole society.

When the landlord chose to occupy himself a part of his own
lands, the rent might be valued according to an equitable arbitra-

Such a system of administration might, perhaps, free a tax of
this kind from any degree of uncertainty, which could occasion

tion of the farmers and landlords in the neighbourhood, and a
moderate abatement of the tax might be granted to him, in the

either oppression or inconveniency to the contributor; and might,
at the same time, serve to introduce into the common manage-

same manner as in the Venetian territory, provided the rent of the
lands which he occupied did not exceed a certain sum. It is of

ment of land such a plan of policy as might contribute a good deal
to the general improvement and good cultivation of the country.

importance that the landlord should be encouraged to cultivate a
part of his own land. His capital is generally greater than that of

The expense of levying a land-tax, which varied with every variation of the rent, would, no doubt, be somewhat greater than that

the tenant, and, with less skill, he can frequently raise a greater
produce. The landlord can afford to try experiments, and is gen-

of levying one which was always rated according to a fixed valuation. Some additional expense would necessarily be incurred, both

erally disposed to do so. His unsuccessful experiments occasion
only a moderate loss to himself. His successful ones contribute to

by the different register-offices which it would be proper to establish in the different districts of the country, and by the different

the improvement and better cultivation of the whole country. It
might be of importance, however, that the abatement of the tax

valuations which might occasionally be made of the lands which
the proprietor chose to occupy himself. The expense of all this,

should encourage him to cultivate to a certain extent only. If the
landlords should, the greater part of them, be tempted to farm the

however, might be very moderate, and much below what is incurred in the levying of many other taxes, which afford a very

whole of their own lands, the country (instead of sober and industrious tenants, who are bound by their own interest to cultivate as

inconsiderable revenue in comparison of what might easily be
drawn from a tax of this kind.

well as their capital and skill will allow them) would be filled with
idle and profligate bailiffs, whose abusive management would soon

The discouragement which a variable land-tax of this kind might
give to the improvement of land, seems to be the most important

degrade the cultivation, and reduce the annual produce of the

objection which can be made to it. The landlord would certainly

682

Adam Smith
be less disposed to improve, when the sovereign, who contributed
nothing to the expense, was to share in the profit of the improve-

likely to be the most advantageous application of every inch of
ground upon his estate. The principal attention of the sovereign

ment. Even this objection might, perhaps, be obviated, by allowing the landlord, before he began his improvement, to ascertain,

ought to be, to encourage, by every means in his power, the attention both of the landlord and of the farmer, by allowing both to

in conjunction with the officers of revenue, the actual value of his
lands, according to the equitable arbitration of a certain number

pursue their own interest in their own way, and according to their
own judgment; by giving to both the most perfect security that

of landlords and farmers in the neighbourhood, equally chosen by
both parties: and by rating him, according to this valuation, for

they shall enjoy the full recompence of their own industry; and by
procuring to both the most extensive market for every part of

such a number of years as might be fully sufficient for his complete indemnification. To draw the attention of the sovereign to-

their produce, in consequence of establishing the easiest and safest
communications, both by land and by water, through every part

wards the improvement of the land, from a regard to the increase
of his own revenue, is one or the principal advantages proposed

of his own dominions, as well as the most unbounded freedom of
exportation to the dominions of all other princes.

by this species of land-tax. The term, therefore, allowed, for the
indemnification of the landlord, ought not to be a great deal longer

If, by such a system of administration, a tax of this kind could
be so managed as to give, not only no discouragement, but, on the

than what was necessary for that purpose, lest the remoteness of
the interest should discourage too much this attention. It had bet-

contrary, some encouragement to the improvement or land, it does
not appear likely to occasion any other inconveniency to the land-

ter, however, be somewhat too long, than in any respect too short.
No incitement to the attention of the sovereign can ever counter-

lord, except always the unavoidable one of being obliged to pay
the tax.

balance the smallest discouragement to that of the landlord. The
attention of the sovereign can be, at best, but a very general and

In all the variations of the state of the society, in the improvement and in the declension of agriculture; in all the variations in

vague consideration of what is likely to contribute to the better
cultivation of the greater part of his dominions. The attention of

the value of silver, and in all those in the standard of the coin, a tax
of this kind would, of its own accord, and without any attention

the landlord is a particular and minute consideration of what is

of government, readily suit itself to the actual situation of things,

683

The Wealth of Nations
and would be equally just and equitable in all those different
changes. It would, therefore, be much more proper to be estab-

tonic order, and of that of Malta, at forty per cent. Lands held by
a noble tenure, at thirty-eight and one-third per cent. Lands held

lished as a perpetual and unalterable regulation, or as what is called
a fundamental law of the commonwealth, than any tax which was

by a base tenure, at thirty-five and one-third per cent.
The survey and valuation of Bohemia is said to have been the

always to be levied according to a certain valuation.
Some states, instead of the simple and obvious expedient of a

work of more than a hundred years. It was not perfected till after
the peace of 1748, by the orders of the present empress queen.

register of leases, have had recourse to the laborious and expensive
one of an actual survey and valuation of all the lands in the coun-

{Id. tom i. p.85, 84.} The survey of the duchy of Milan, which
was begun in the time of Charles VI., was not perfected till after

try. They have suspected, probably, that the lessor and lessee, in
order to defraud the public revenue, might combine to conceal

1760 It is esteemed one of the most accurate that has ever been
made. The survey of Savoy and Piedmont was executed under the

the real terms of the lease. Doomsday-book seems to have been
the result of a very accurate survey of this kind.

orders of the late king of Sardinia. {Id. p. 280, etc.; also p, 287.
etc. to 316.}

In the ancient dominions of the king of Prussia, the land-tax is
assessed according to an actual survey and valuation, which is re-

In the dominions of the king of Prussia, the revenue of the church
is taxed much higher than that of lay proprietors. The revenue of

viewed and altered from time to time. {Memoires concurent les
Droits, etc. tom, i. p. 114, 115, 116, etc.} According to that valu-

the church is, the greater part of it, a burden upon the rent of
land. It seldom happens that any part of it is applied towards the

ation, the lay proprietors pay from twenty to twenty-five per cent.
of their revenue; ecclesiastics from forty to forty-five per cent. The

improvement of land; or is so employed as to contribute, in any
respect, towards increasing the revenue of the great body of the

survey and valuation of Silesia was made by order of the present
king, it is said, with great accuracy. According to that valuation,

people. His Prussian majesty had probably, upon that account,
thought it reasonable that it should contribute a good deal more

the lands belonging to the bishop of Breslaw are taxed at twentyfive per cent. of their rent. The other revenues of the ecclesiastics

towards relieving the exigencies of the state. In some countries,
the lands of the church are exempted from all taxes. In others,

of both religions at fifty per cent. The commanderies of the Teu-

they are taxed more lightly than other lands. In the duchy of Milan,

684

Adam Smith
the lands which the church possessed before 1575, are rated to the
tax at a third only or their value.

which, if it is continued, will probably, in the long-run, occasion
much more trouble and vexation than it can possibly bring relief

In Silesia, lands held by a noble tenure are taxed three per cent.
higher than those held by a base tenure. The honours and privi-

to the contributors.
In 1666, the generality of Montauban was assessed to the real or

leges of different kinds annexed to the former, his Prussian majesty had probably imagined, would sufficiently compensate to the

predial taille, according, it is said, to a very exact survey and valuation. {Memoires concernant les Droits, etc. tom. ii p. 139, etc.}

proprietor a small aggravation of the tax; while, at the same time,
the humiliating inferiority of the latter would be in some measure

By 1727, this assessment had become altogether unequal. In order to remedy this inconveniency, government has found no bet-

alleviated, by being taxed somewhat more lightly. In other countries, the system of taxation, instead of alleviating, aggravates this

ter expedient, than to impose upon the whole generality an additional tax of a hundred and twenty thousand livres. This addi-

inequality. In the dominions of the king of Sardinia, and in those
provinces of France which are subject to what is called the real or

tional tax is rated upon all the different districts subject to the
taille according to the old assessment. But it is levied only upon

predial taille, the tax falls altogether upon the lands held by a base
tenure. Those held by a noble one are exempted.

those which, in the actual state of things, are by that assessment
under-taxed; and it is applied to the relief of those which, by the

A land tax assessed according to a general survey and valuation,
how equal soever it may be at first, must, in the course of a very

same assessment, are over-taxed. Two districts, for example, one
of which ought, in the actual state of things, to be taxed at nine

moderate period of time, become unequal. To prevent its becoming so would require the continual and painful attention of gov-

hundred, the other at eleven hundred livres, are, by the old assessment, both taxed at a thousand livres. Both these districts are, by

ernment to all the variations in the state and produce of every
different farm in the country. The governments of Prussia, of

the additional tax, rated at eleven hundred livres each. But this
additional tax is levied only upon the district under-charged, and

Bohemia, of Sardinia, and of the duchy of Milan, actually exert an
attention of this kind; an attention so unsuitable to the nature of

it is applied altogether to the relief of that overcharged, which
consequently pays only nine hundred livres. The government nei-

government, that it is not likely to be of long continuance, and

ther gains nor loses by the additional tax, which is applied alto-

685

The Wealth of Nations
gether to remedy the inequalities arising from the old assessment.
The application is pretty much regulated according to the discre-

with the ordinary profits of farming stock in the neighbourhood.
The other half, or, what comes to the same thing, the value of the

tion of the intendant of the generality, and must, therefore, be in
a great measure arbitrary.

other half, he could afford to pay as rent to the landlord, if there
was no tythe. But if a tenth of the produce is taken from him in

Taxes which are proportioned, not in the Rent, but to the
Produce of Land.

the way of tythe, he must require an abatement of the fifth part of
his rent, otherwise he cannot get back his capital with the ordinary profit. In this case, the rent of the landlord, instead of amounting to a half, or five-tenths of the whole produce, will amount

Taxes upon the produce of land are, In reality, taxes upon the rent;
and though they may be originally advanced by the farmer, are fi-

only to four-tenths of it. In poorer lands, on the contrary, the
produce is sometimes so small, and the expense of cultivation so

nally paid by the landlord. When a certain portion of the produce is
to be paid away for a tax, the farmer computes as well as he can,

great, that it requires four-fifths of the whole produce, to replace
to the farmer his capital with the ordinary profit. In this case,

what the value of this portion is, one year with another, likely to
amount to, and he makes a proportionable abatement in the rent

though there was no tythe, the rent of the landlord could amount
to no more than one-fifth or two-tenths of the whole produce.

which he agrees to pay to the landlord. There is no farmer who does
not compute beforehand what the church tythe, which is a land tax

But if the farmer pays one-tenth of the produce in the way of
tythe, he must require an equal abatement of the rent of the land-

of this kind, is, one year with another, likely to amount to.
The tythe, and every other land tax of this kind, under the ap-

lord, which will thus be reduced to one-tenth only of the whole
produce. Upon the rent of rich lands the tythe may sometimes be

pearance of perfect equality, are very unequal taxes; a certain portion of the produce being in differrent situations, equivalent to a

a tax of no more than one-fifth part, or four shillings in the pound;
whereas upon that of poorer lands, it may sometimes be a tax of

very different portion of the rent. In some very rich lands, the
produce is so great, that the one half of it is fully sufficient to

one half, or of ten shillings in the pound.
The tythe, as it is frequently a very unequal tax upon the rent, so

replace to the farmer his capital employed in cultivation, together

it is always a great discouragement, both to the improvements of

686

Adam Smith
the landlord, and to the cultivation of the farmer. The one cannot
venture to make the most important, which are generally the most

amounted to about a fifth part of the produce. The land tax of
ancient Egypt is said likewise to have amounted to a fifth part.

expensive improvements; nor the other to raise the most valuable,
which are generally, too, the most expensive crops; when the church,

In Asia, this sort of land tax is said to interest the sovereign in the
improvement and cultivation of land. The sovereigns of China, those

which lays out no part of the expense, is to share so very largely in
the profit. The cultivation of madder was, for a long time, confined

of Bengal while under the Mahometan govermnent, and those of
ancient Egypt, are said, accordingly, to have been extremely atten-

by the tythe to the United Provinces, which, being presbyterian
countries, and upon that account exempted from this destructive

tive to the making and maintaining of good roads and navigable
canals, in order to increase, as much as possible, both the quantity

tax, enjoyed a sort of monopoly of that useful dyeing drug against
the rest of Europe. The late attempts to introduce the culture of this

and value of every part of the produce of the land, by procuring to
every part of it the most extensive market which their own domin-

plant into England, have been made only in consequence of the
statute, which enacted that five shillings an acre should be received

ions could afford. The tythe of the church is divided into such small
portions that no one of its proprietors can have any interest of this

in lieu of all manner of tythe upon madder.
As through the greater part of Europe, the church, so in many

kind. The parson of a parish could never find his account, in making a road or canal to a distant part of the country, in order to

different countries of Asia, the state, is principally supported by a
land tax, proportioned not to the rent, but to the produce of the

extend the market for the produce of his own particular parish.
Such taxes, when destined for the maintenance of the state, have

land. In China, the principal revenue of the sovereign consists in a
tenth part of the produce of all the lands of the empire. This tenth

some advantages, which may serve in some measure to balance their
inconveniency. When destined for the maintenance of the church,

part, however, is estimated so very moderately, that, in many provinces, it is said not to exceed a thirtieth part of the ordinary pro-

they are attended with nothing but inconveniency.
Taxes upon the produce of land may be levied, either in kind,

duce. The land tax or land rent which used to be paid to the
Mahometan government of Bengal, before that country fell into

or, according to a certain valuation in money.
The parson of a parish, or a gentleman of small fortune who

the hands of the English East India company, is said to have

lives upon his estate, may sometimes, perhaps find some advan-

687

The Wealth of Nations
tage in receiving, the one his tythe, and the other his rent, in kind.
The quantity to be collected, and the district within which it is to

bushel of wheat, for example, being always valued at one and the
same money price, whatever may be the state of the market. The

be collected, are so small, that they both can oversee, with their
own eyes, the collection and disposal of every part of what is due

produce of a tax levied in the former way will vary only according
to the variations in the real produce of the land, according to the

to them. A gentleman of great fortune, who lived in the capital,
would be in danger of suffering much by the neglect, and more by

improvement or neglect of cultivation. The produce of a tax levied in the latter way will vary, not only according to the variations

the fraud, of his factors and agents, if the rents of an estate in a
distant province were to be paid to him in this manner. The loss of

in the produce of the land, but according both to those in the
value of the precious metals, and those in the quantity of those

the sovereign, from the abuse and depredation of his tax-gatherers, would necessarily be much greater. The servants of the most

metals which is at different times contained in coin of the same
denomination. The produce of the former will always bear the

careless private person are, perhaps, more under the eye of their
master than those of the most careful prince; and a public rev-

same proportion to the value of the real produce of the land. The
produce of the latter may, at different times, bear very different

enue, which was paid in kind, would suffer so much from the
mismanagement of the collectors, that a very small part of what

proportions to that value.
When, instead either of a certain portion of the produce of land,

was levied upon the people would ever arrive at the treasury of the
prince. Some part of the public revenue of China, however, is said

or of the price of a certain portion, a certain sum of money is to be
paid in full compensation for all tax or tythe; the tax becomes, in

to be paid in this manner. The mandarins and other tax-gatherers
will, no doubt, find their advantage in continuing the practice of

this case, exactly of the same nature with the land tax of England.
It neither rises nor falls with the rent of the land. It neither en-

a payment, which is so much more liable to abuse than any payment in money.

courages nor discourages improvement. The tythe in the greater
part of those parishes which pay what is called a modus, in lieu of

A tax upon the produce of land, which is levied in money, may
be levied, either according to a valuation, which varies with all the

all other tythe is a tax of this kind. During the Mahometan government of Bengal, instead of the payment in kind of the fifth

variations of the market price; or according to a fixed valuation, a

part of the produce, a modus, and, it is said, a very moderate one,

688

Adam Smith
was established in the greater part of the districts or zemindaries
of the country. Some of the servants of the East India company,

same thing, to replace, within a certain term of years, the capital
which had been employed in building it. The building-rent, or

under pretence of restoring the public revenue to its proper value,
have, in some provinces, exchanged this modus for a payment in

the ordinary profit of building, is, therefore, everywhere regulated
by the ordinary interest of money. Where the market rate of inter-

kind. Under their management, this change is likely both to discourage cultivation, and to give new opportunities for abuse in

est is four per cent. the rent of a house, which, over and above
paying the ground-rent, affords six or six and a-half per cent. upon

the collection of the public revenue, which has fallen very much
below what it was said to have been when it first fell under the

the whole expense of building, may, perhaps, afford a sufficient
profit to the builder. Where the market rate of interest is five per

management of the company. The servants of the company may,
perhaps, have profited by the change, but at the expense, it is

cent. it may perhaps require seven or seven and a half per cent. If,
in proportion to the interest of money, the trade of the builders

probable, both of their masters and of the country.

affords at any time much greater profit than this, it will soon draw
so much capital from other trades as will reduce the profit to its

Taxes upon the Rent of Houses.

proper level. If it affords at any time much less than this, other
trades will soon draw so much capital from it as will again raise

The rent of a house may be distinguished into two parts, of which
the one may very properly be called the building-rent; the other is

that profit.
Whatever part of the whole rent of a house is over and above

commonly called the ground-rent.
The building-rent is the interest or profit of the capital expended

what is sufficient for affording this reasonable profit, naturally
goes to the ground-rent; and, where the owner of the ground and

in building the house. In order to put the trade of a builder upon
a level with other trades, it is necessary that this rent should be

the owner of the building are two different persons, is, in most
cases, completely paid to the former. This surplus rent is the price

sufficient, first, to pay him the same interest which he would have
got for his capital, if he had lent it upon good security; and, sec-

which the inhabitant of the house pays for some real or supposed
advantage of the situation. In country houses, at a distance from

ondly, to keep the house in constant repair, or, what comes to the

any great town, where there is plenty of ground to chuse upon,

689

The Wealth of Nations
the ground-rent is scarce anything, or no more than what the
ground which the house stands upon would pay, if employed in

A house of sixty pounds rent will, in that case, cost him seventytwo pounds a-year, which is twelve pounds more than he thinks

agriculture. In country villas, in the neighbourhood of some great
town, it is sometimes a good deal higher; and the peculiar

he can afford. He will, therefore, content himself with a worse
house, or a house of fifty pounds rent, which, with the additional

conveniency or beauty of situation is there frequently very well
paid for. Ground-rents are generally highest in the capital, and in

ten pounds that he must pay for the tax, will make up the sum of
sixty pounds a-year, the expense which he judges he can afford,

those particular parts of it where there happens to be the greatest
demand for houses, whatever be the reason of that demand, whether

and, in order to pay the tax, he will give up a part of the additional
conveniency which he might have had from a house of ten pounds

for trade and business, for pleasure and society, or for mere vanity
and fashion.

a-year more rent. He will give up, I say, a part of this additional
conveniency; for he will seldom be obliged to give up the whole,

A tax upon house-rent, payable by the tenant, and proportioned
to the whole rent of each house, could not, for any considerable

but will, in consequence of the tax, get a better house for fifty
pounds a-year, than he could have got if there had been no tax for

time at least, affect the building-rent. If the builder did not get his
reasonable profit, he would be obliged to quit the trade; which, by

as a tax of this kind, by taking away this particular competitor,
must diminish the competition for houses of sixty pounds rent, so

raising the demand for building, would, in a short time, bring
back his profit to its proper level with that of other trades. Neither

it must likewise diminish it for those of fifty pounds rent, and in
the same manner for those of all other rents, except the lowest

would such a tax fall altogether upon the ground-rent; but it would
divide itself in such a manner, as to fall partly upon the inhabitant

rent, for which it would for some time increase the competition.
But the rents of every class of houses for which the competition

of the house, and partly upon the owner of the ground.
Let us suppose, for example, that a particular person judges that

was diminished, would necessarily be more or less reduced. As no
part of this reduction, however, could for any considerable time at

he can afford for house-rent all expense of sixty pounds a-year;
and let us suppose, too, that a tax of four shillings in the pound,

least, affect the building-rent, the whole of it must, in the longrun, necessarily fall upon the ground-rent. The final payment of

or of one-fifth, payable by the inhabitant, is laid upon house-rent.

this tax, therefore, would fall partly upon the inhabitant of the

690

Adam Smith
house, who, in order to pay his share, would be obliged to give up
a part of his conveniency; and partly upon the owner of the ground,

and vanities which they possess. A tax upon house-rents, therefore, would in general fall heaviest upon the rich; and in this sort

who, in order to pay his share, would be obliged to give up a part
of his revenue. In what proportion this final payment would be

of inequality there would not, perhaps, be any thing very unreasonable It is not very unreasonable that the rich should contribute

divided between them, it is not, perhaps, very easy to ascertain.
The division would probably be very different in different cir-

to the public expense, not only in proportion to their revenue, but
something more than in that proportion.

cumstances, and a tax of this kind might, according to those different circumstances, affect very unequally, both the inhabitant of

The rent of houses, though it in some respects resembles the
rent of land, is in one respect essentially different from it. The rent

the house and the owner of the ground.
The inequality with which a tax of this kind might fall upon the

of land is paid for the use of a productive subject. The land which
pays it produces it. The rent of houses is paid for the use of an

owners of different ground-rents, would arise altogether from the
accidental inequality of this division. But the inequality with which

unproductive subject. Neither the house, nor the ground which it
stands upon, produce anything. The person who pays the rent,

it might fall upon the inhabitants of different houses, would arise,
not only from this, but from another cause. The proportion of the

therefore, must draw it from some other source of revenue, distinct from and independent of this subject. A tax upon the rent of

expense of house-rent to the whole expense of living, is different
in the different degrees of fortune. It is, perhaps, highest in the

houses, so far as it falls upon the inhabitants, must be drawn from
the same source as the rent itself, and must be paid from their

highest degree, and it diminishes gradually through the inferior
degrees, so as in general to be lowest in the lowest degree. The

revenue, whether derived from the wages of labour, the profits of
stock, or the rent of land. So far as it falls upon the inhabitants, it

necessaries of life occasion the great expense of the poor. They
find it difficult to get food, and the greater part of their little rev-

is one of those taxes which fall, not upon one only, but indifferently upon all the three different sources of revenue; and is, in

enue is spent in getting it. The luxuries and vanities of life occasion the principal expense of the rich; and a magnificent house

every respect, of the same nature as a tax upon any other sort of
consumable commodities. In general, there is not perhaps, any

embellishes and sets off to the best advantage all the other luxuries

one article of expense or consumption by which the liberality or

691

The Wealth of Nations
narrowness of a man’s whole expense can be better judged of than
by his house-rent. A proportional tax upon this particular article

this country, will find that, at the rate of only six and a-half, or
seven per cent. upon the original expense of building, their house-

of expense might, perhaps, produce a more considerable revenue
than any which has hitherto been drawn from it in any part of

rent is nearly equal to the whole neat rent of their estates. It is the
accumulated expense of several successive generations, laid out

Europe. If the tax, indeed, was very high, the greater part of people
would endeavour to evade it as much as they could, by contenting

upon objects of great beauty and magnificence, indeed, but, in
proportion to what they cost, of very small exchangeable value.

themselves with smaller houses, and by turning the greater part of
their expense into some other channel.

{Since the first publication of this book, a tax nearly upon the
above-mentioned principles has been imposed.}

The rent of houses might easily be ascertained with sufficient
accuracy, by a policy of the same kind with that which would be

Ground-rents are a still more proper subject of taxation than
the rent of houses. A tax upon ground-rents would not raise the

necessary for ascertaining the ordinary rent of land. Houses not
inhabited ought to pay no tax. A tax upon them would fall alto-

rent of houses; it would fall altogether upon the owner of the
ground-rent, who acts always as a monopolist, and exacts the great-

gether upon the proprietor, who would thus be taxed for a subject
which afforded him neither conveniency nor revenue. Houses in-

est rent which can be got for the use of his ground. More or less
can be got for it, according as the competitors happen to be richer

habited by the proprietor ought to be rated, not according to the
expense which they might have cost in building, but according to

or poorer, or can afford to gratify their fancy for a particular spot
of ground at a greater or smaller expense. In every country, the

the rent which an equitable arbitration might judge them likely to
bring if leased to a tenant. If rated according to the expense which

greatest number of rich competitors is in the capital, and it is
there accordingly that the highest ground-rents are always to be

they might have cost in building, a tax of three or four shillings in
the pound, joined with other taxes, would ruin almost all the rich

found. As the wealth of those competitors would in no respect be
increased by a tax upon ground-rents, they would not probably be

and great families of this, and, I believe, of every other civilized
country. Whoever will examine with attention the different town

disposed to pay more for the use of the ground. Whether the tax
was to be advanced by the inhabitant or by the owner of the ground,

and country houses of some of the richest and greatest families in

would be of little importance. The more the inhabitant was obliged

692

Adam Smith
to pay for the tax, the less he would incline to pay for the ground;
so that the final payment of the tax would fall altogether upon the

so much more than its real value for the ground which they build
their houses upon; or to make to its owner so much more than

owner of the ground-rent. The ground-rents of uninhabited houses
ought to pay no tax.

compensation for the loss which he might sustain by this use of it.
Nothing can be more reasonable, than that a fund, which owes its

Both ground-rents, and the ordinary rent of land, are a species
of revenue which the owner, in many cases, enjoys without any

existence to the good government of the state, should be taxed
peculiarly, or should contribute something more than the greater

care or attention of his own. Though a part of this revenue should
be taken from him in order to defray the expenses of the state, no

part of other funds, towards the support of that government.
Though, in many different countries of Europe, taxes have been

discouragement will thereby be given to any sort of industry. The
annual produce of the land and labour of the society, the real wealth

imposed upon the rent of houses, I do not know of any in which
ground-rents have been considered as a separate subject of taxa-

and revenue of the great body of the people, might be the same
after such a tax as before. Ground-rents, and the ordinary rent of

tion. The contrivers of taxes have, probably, found some difficulty
in ascertaining what part of the rent ought to be considered as

land, are therefore, perhaps, the species of revenue which can best
bear to have a peculiar tax imposed upon them.

ground-rent, and what part ought to be considered as buildingrent. It should not, however, seem very difficult to distinguish

Ground-rents seem, in this respect, a more proper subject of
peculiar taxation, than even the ordinary rent of land. The ordi-

those two parts of the rent from one another.
In Great Britain the rent of houses is supposed to be taxed in the

nary rent of land is, in many cases, owing partly, at least, to the
attention and good management of the landlord. A very heavy tax

same proportion as the rent of land, by what is called the annual
land tax. The valuation, according to which each different parish

might discourage, too much, this attention and good management. Ground-rents, so far as they exceed the ordinary rent of

and district is assessed to this tax, is always the same. It was originally extremely unequal, and it still continues to be so. Through

land, are altogether owing to the good government of the sovereign, which, by protecting the industry either of the whole people

the greater part of the kingdom this tax falls still more lightly
upon the rent of houses than upon that of land. In some few

or of the inhabitants of some particular place, enables them to pay

districts only, which were originally rated high, and in which the

693

The Wealth of Nations
rents of houses have fallen considerably, the land tax of three or
four shillings in the pound is said to amount to an equal propor-

The contrivers of the several taxes which in England have, at
different times, been imposed upon houses, seem to have imag-

tion of the real rent of houses. Untenanted houses, though by law
subject to the tax, are, in most districts, exempted from it by the

ined that there was some great difficulty in ascertaining, with tolerable exactness, what was the real rent of every house. They have

favour of the assessors; and this exemption sometimes occasions
some little variation in the rate of particular houses, though that

regulated their taxes, therefore, according to some more obvious
circumstance, such as they had probably imagined would, in most

of the district is always the same. Improvements of rent, by new
buildings, repairs, etc. go to the discharge of the district, which

cases, bear some proportion to the rent.
The first tax of this kind was hearth-money; or a tax of two

occasions still further variations in the rate of particular houses.
In the province of Holland, {Memoires concernant les Droits,

shillings upon every hearth. In order to ascertain how many hearths
were in the house, it was necessary that the tax-gatherer should

etc. p. 223.} every house is taxed at two and a-half per cent. of its
value, without any regard, either to the rent which it actually pays,

enter every room in it. This odious visit rendered the tax odious.
Soon after the Revolution, therefore, it was abolished as a badge

or to the circumstance of its being tenanted or untenanted. There
seems to be a hardship in obliging the proprietor to pay a tax for

of slavery.
The next tax of this kind was a tax of two shillings upon every

an untenanted house, from which he can derive no revenue, especially so very heavy a tax. In Holland, where the market rate of

dwelling-house inhabited. A house with ten windows to pay four
shillings more. A house with twenty windows and upwards to pay

interest does not exceed three per cent., two and a-half per cent.
upon the whole value of the house must, in most cases, amount to

eight shillings. This tax was afterwards so far altered, that houses
with twenty windows, and with less than thirty, were ordered to

more than a third of the building-rent, perhaps of the whole rent.
The valuation, indeed, according to which the houses are rated,

pay ten shillings, and those with thirty windows and upwards to
pay twenty shillings. The number of windows can, in most cases,

though very unequal, is said to be always below the real value.
When a house is rebuilt, improved, or enlarged, there is a new

be counted from the outside, and, in all cases, without entering
every room in the house. The visit of the tax-gatherer, therefore,

valuation, and the tax is rated accordingly.

was less offensive in this tax than in the hearth-money.

694

Adam Smith
This tax was afterwards repealed, and in the room of it was
established the window-tax, which has undergone two several al-

imposition of the window tax, however, the rents of houses have,
upon the whole, risen more or less, in almost every town and vil-

terations and augmentations. The window tax, as it stands at
present (January 1775), over and above the duty of three shillings

lage of Great Britain, with which I am acquainted. Such has been,
almost everywhere, the increase of the demand for houses, that it

upon every house in England, and of one shilling upon every house
in Scotland, lays a duty upon every window, which in England

has raised the rents more than the window tax could sink them;
one of the many proofs of the great prosperity of the country, and

augments gradually from twopence, the lowest rate upon houses
with not more than seven windows, to two shillings, the highest

of the increasing revenue of its inhabitants. Had it not been for
the tax, rents would probably have risen still higher.

rate upon houses with twenty-five windows and upwards.
The principal objection to all such taxes is their inequality; an
inequality of the worst kind, as they must frequently fall much
heavier upon the poor than upon the rich. A house of ten pounds

ARTICLE II. — Taxes upon Profit, or upon the Revenue
arising from Stock.
The revenue or profit arising from stock naturally divides itself

rent in a country town, may sometimes have more windows than
a house of five hundred pounds rent in London; and though the

into two parts; that which pays the interest, and which belongs to
the owner of the stock; and that surplus part which is over and

inhabitant of the former is likely to be a much poorer man than
that of the latter, yet, so far as his contribution is regulated by the

above what is necessary for paying the interest.
This latter part of profit is evidently a subject not taxable di-

window tax, he must contribute more to the support of the state.
Such taxes are, therefore, directly contrary to the first of the four

rectly. It is the compensation, and, in most cases, it is no more
than a very moderate compensation for the risk and trouble of

maxims above mentioned. They do not seem to offend much
against any of the other three.

employing the stock. The employer must have this compensation,
otherwise he cannot, consistently with his own interest, continue

The natural tendency of the window tax, and of all other taxes
upon houses, is to lower rents. The more a man pays for the tax,

the employment. If he was taxed directly, therefore, in proportion
to the whole profit, he would be obliged either to raise the rate of

the less, it is evident, he can afford to pay for the rent. Since the

his profit, or to charge the tax upon the interest of money; that is,

695

The Wealth of Nations
to pay less interest. If he raised the rate of his profit in proportion
to the tax, the whole tax, though it might be advanced by him,

pensating the whole risk and trouble of employing the stock. As a
tax upon the rent of land cannot raise rents, because the neat pro-

would be finally paid by one or other of two different sets of people,
according to the different ways in which he might employ the

duce which remains, after replacing the stock of the farmer, together with his reasonable profit, cannot be greater after the tax

stock of which he had the management. If he employed it as a
farming stock, in the cultivation of land, he could raise the rate of

than before it, so, for the same reason, a tax upon the interest of
money could not raise the rate of interest; the quantity of stock or

his profit only by retaining a greater portion, or, what comes to
the same thing, the price of a greater portion, of the produce of

money in the country, like the quantity of land, being supposed
to remain the same after the tax as before it. The ordinary rate of

the land; and as this could be done only by a reduction of rent, the
final payment of the tax would fall upon the landlord. If he em-

profit, it has been shewn, in the first book, is everywhere regulated
by the quantity of stock to be employed, in proportion to the

ployed it as a mercantile or manufacturing stock, he could raise
the rate of his profit only by raising the price of his goods; in

quantity of the employment, or of the business which must be
done by it. But the quantity of the employment, or of the business

which case, the final payment of the tax would fall altogether upon
the consumers of those goods. If he did not raise the rate of his

to be done by stock, could neither be increased nor diminished by
any tax upon the interest of money. If the quantity of the stock to

profit, he would be obliged to charge the whole tax upon that part
of it which was allotted for the interest of money. He could afford

be employed, therefore, was neither increased nor diminished by
it, the ordinary rate of profit would necessarily remain the same.

less interest for whatever stock he borrowed, and the whole weight
of the tax would, in this case, fall ultimately upon the interest of

But the portion of this profit, necessary for compensating the risk
and trouble of the employer, would likewise remain the same; that

money. So far as he could not relieve himself from the tax in the
one way, he would be obliged to relieve himself in the other.

risk and trouble being in no respect altered. The residue, therefore, that portion which belongs to the owner of the stock, and

The interest of money seems, at first sight, a subject equally
capable of being taxed directly as the rent of land. Like the rent of

which pays the interest of money, would necessarily remain the
same too. At first sight, therefore, the interest of money seems to

land, it is a neat produce, which remains, after completely com-

be a subject as fit to be taxed directly as the rent of land.

696

Adam Smith
There are, however, two different circumstances, which render
the interest of money a much less proper subject of direct taxation

business, or enjoy his fortune more at his ease. By removing his
stock, he would put an end to all the industry which it had main-

than the rent of land.
First, the quantity and value of the land which any man pos-

tained in the country which he left. Stock cultivates land; stock
employs labour. A tax which tended to drive away stock from any

sesses, can never be a secret, and can always be ascertained with
great exactness. But the whole amount of the capital stock which

particular country, would so far tend to dry up every source of
revenue, both to the sovereign and to the society. Not only the

he possesses is almost always a secret, and can scarce ever be ascertained with tolerable exactness. It is liable, besides, to almost con-

profits of stock, but the rent of land, and the wages of labour,
would necessarily be more or less diminished by its removal.

tinual variations. A year seldom passes away, frequently not a
month, sometimes scarce a single day, in which it does not rise or

The nations, accordingly, who have attempted to tax the revenue arising from stock, instead of any severe inquisition of this

fall more or less. An inquisition into every man’s private circumstances, and an inquisition which, in order to accommodate the

kind, have been obliged to content themselves with some very
loose, and, therefore, more or less arbitrary estimation. The ex-

tax to them, watched over all the fluctuations of his fortune, would
be a source of such continual and endless vexation as no person

treme inequality and uncertainty of a tax assessed in this manner,
can be compensated only by its extreme moderation; in conse-

could support.
Secondly, land is a subject which cannot be removed; whereas

quence of which, every man finds himself rated so very much
below his real revenue, that he gives himself little disturbance

stock easily may. The proprietor of land is necessarily a citizen of
the particular country in which his estate lies. The proprietor of

though his neighbour should be rated somewhat lower.
By what is called the land tax in England, it was intended that

stock is properly a citizen of the world, and is not necessarily attached to any particular country. He would be apt to abandon the

the stock should be taxed in the same proportion as land. When
the tax upon land was at four shillings in the pound, or at one-

country in which he was exposed to a vexatious inquisition, in
order to be assessed to a burdensome tax; and would remove his

fifth of the supposed rent, it was intended that stock should be
taxed at one-fifth of the supposed interest. When the present an-

stock to some other country, where he could either carry on his

nual land tax was first imposed, the legal rate of interest was six

697

The Wealth of Nations
per cent. Every hundred pounds stock, accordingly, was supposed
to be taxed at twenty-four shillings, the fifth part of six pounds.

the fiftieth part of its actual value. In some towns, the whole land
tax is assessed upon houses; as in Westminster, where stock and

Since the legal rate of interest has been reduced to five per cent.
every hundred pounds stock is supposed to be taxed at twenty

trade are free. It is otherwise in London.
In all countries, a severe inquisition into the circumstances of

shillings only. The sum to be raised, by what is called the land tax,
was divided between the country and the principal towns. The

private persons has been carefully avoided.
At Hamburg, {Memoires concernant les Droits, tom. i, p.74}

greater part of it was laid upon the country; and of what was laid
upon the towns, the greater part was assessed upon the houses.

every inhabitant is obliged to pay to the state one fourth per cent.
of all that he possesses; and as the wealth of the people of Ham-

What remained to be assessed upon the stock or trade of the towns
(for the stock upon the land was not meant to be taxed) was very

burg consists principally in stock, this tax maybe considered as a
tax upon stock. Every man assesses himself, and, in the presence

much below the real value of that stock or trade. Whatever inequalities, therefore, there might be in the original assessment,

of the magistrate, puts annually into the public coffer a certain
sum of money, which he declares upon oath, to be one fourth per

gave little disturbance. Every parish and district still continues to
be rated for its land, its houses, and its stock, according to the

cent. of all that he possesses, but without declaring what it amounts
to, or being liable to any examination upon that subject. This tax

original assessment; and the almost universal prosperity of the
country, which, in most places, has raised very much the value of

is generally supposed to be paid with great fidelity. In a small republic, where the people have entire confidence in their magis-

all these, has rendered those inequalities of still less importance
now. The rate, too, upon each district, continuing always the same,

trates, are convinced of the necessity of the tax for the support of
the state, and believe that it will be faithfully applied to that pur-

the uncertainty of this tax, so far as it might he assessed upon the
stock of any individual, has been very much diminished, as well as

pose, such conscientious and voluntary payment may sometimes
be expected. It is not peculiar to the people of Hamburg.

rendered of much less consequence. If the greater part of the lands
of England are not rated to the land tax at half their actual value,

The canton of Underwald, in Switzerland, is frequently ravaged
by storms and inundations, and it is thereby exposed to extraordi-

the greater part of the stock of England is, perhaps, scarce rated at

nary expenses. Upon such occasions the people assemble, and ev-

698

Adam Smith
ery one is said to declare with the greatest frankness what he is
worth, in order to be taxed accordingly. At Zurich, the law orders,

to all such projects, do not feel that they have occasion for any
such concealment.

that in cases of necessity, every one should be taxed in proportion
to his revenue; the amount of which he is obliged to declare upon

In Holland, soon after the exaltation of the late prince of Orange to the stadtholdership, a tax of two per cent. or the fiftieth

oath. They have no suspicion, it is said, that any of their fellow
citizens will deceive them. At Basil, the principal revenue of the

penny, as it was called, was imposed upon the whole substance of
every citizen. Every citizen assesed himself, and paid his tax, in the

state arises from a small custom upon goods exported. All the
citizens make oath, that they will pay every three months all the

same manner as at Hamburg, and it was in general supposed to
have been paid with great fidelity. The people had at that time the

taxes imposed by law. All merchants, and even all inn-keepers, are
trusted with keeping themselves the account of the goods which

greatest affection for their new government, which they had just
established by a general insurrection. The tax was to be paid but

they sell, either within or without the territory. At the end of every
three months, they send this account to the treasurer, with the

once, in order to relieve the state in a particular exigency. It was,
indeed, too heavy to be permanent. In a country where the mar-

amount of the tax computed at the bottom of it. It is not suspected that the revenue suffers by this confidence. {Memoires

ket rate of interest seldom exceeds three per cent., a tax of two per
cent. amounts to thirteen shillings and four pence in the pound,

concernant les Droits, tom. i p. 163, 167,171.}
To oblige every citizen to declare publicly upon oath, the amount

upon the highest neat revenue which is commonly drawn from
stock. It is a tax which very few people could pay, without en-

of his fortune, must not, it seems, in those Swiss cantons, be reckoned a hardship. At Hamburg it would be reckoned the greatest.

croaching more or less upon their capitals. In a particular exigency, the people may, from great public zeal, make a great effort,

Merchants engaged in the hazardous projects of trade, all tremble
at the thoughts of being obliged, at all times, to expose the real

and give up even a part of their capital, in order to relieve the
state. But it is impossible that they should continue to do so for

state of their circumstances. The ruin of their credit, and the miscarriage of their projects, they foresee, would too often be the

any considerable time; and if they did, the tax would soon ruin
them so completely, as to render them altogether incapable of sup-

consequence. A sober and parsimonious people, who are strangers

porting the state.

699

The Wealth of Nations
The tax upon stock, imposed by the land tax bill in England,
though it is proportioned to the capital, is not intended to dimin-

A tax, however, upon the profits of stock employed in any particular branch of trade, can never fall finally upon the dealers (who

ish or, take away any part of that capital. It is meant only to be a
tax upon the interest of money, proportioned to that upon the

must in all ordinary cases have their reasonable profit, and, where
the competition is free, can seldom have more than that profit),

rent of land; so that when the latter is at four shillings in the pound,
the former may be at four shillings in the pound too. The tax at

but always upon the consumers, who must be obliged to pay in
the price of the goods the tax which the dealer advances; and gen-

Hamburg, and the still more moderate taxes of Underwald and
Zurich, are meant, in the same manner, to be taxes, not upon the

erally with some overcharge.
A tax of this kind, when it is proportioned to the trade of the

capital, but upon the interest or neat revenue of stock. That of
Holland was meant to be a tax upon the capital.

dealer, is finally paid by the consumer, and occasions no oppression to the dealer. When it is not so proportioned, but is the same

Taxes upon the Profit of particular Employments.

upon all dealers, though in this case, too, it is finally paid by the
consumer, yet it favours the great, and occasions some oppression

In some countries, extraordinary taxes are imposed upon the profits

to the small dealer. The tax of five shillings a-week upon every
hackney coach, and that of ten shillings a-year upon every hack-

of stock; sometimes when employed in particular branches of trade,
and sometimes when employed in agriculture.

ney chair, so far as it is advanced by the different keepers of such
coaches and chairs, is exactly enough proportioned to the extent

Of the former kind, are in England, the tax upon hawkers and
pedlars, that upon hackney-coaches and chairs, and that which

of their respective dealings. It neither favours the great, nor oppresses the smaller dealer. The tax of twenty shillings a-year for a

the keepers of ale-houses pay for a licence to retail ale and spiritous
liquors. During the late war, another tax of the same kind was

licence to sell ale; of forty shillings for a licence to sell spiritous
liquors; and of forty shillings more for a licence to sell wine, being

proposed upon shops. The war having been undertaken, it was
said, in defence of the trade of the country, the merchants, who

the same upon all retailers, must necessarily give some advantage
to the great, and occasion some oppression to the small dealers.

were to profit by it, ought to contribute towards the support of it.

The former must find it more easy to get back the tax in the price

700

Adam Smith
of their goods than the latter. The moderation of the tax, however,
renders this inequality of less importance; and it may to many

In the disorderly state of Europe, during the prevalence of the
feudal government, the sovereign was obliged to content himself

people appear not improper to give some discouragement to the
multiplication of little ale-houses. The tax upon shops, it was in-

with taxing those who were too weak to refuse to pay taxes. The
great lords, though willing to assist him upon particular emergen-

tended, should be the same upon all shops. It could not well have
been otherwise. It would have been impossible to proportion, with

cies, refused to subject themselves to any constant tax, and he was
not strong enough to force them. The occupiers of land all over

tolerable exactness, the tax upon a shop to the extent of the trade
carried on in it, without such an inquisition as would have been

Europe were, the greater part of them, originally bond-men.
Through the greater part of Europe, they were gradually emanci-

altogether insupportable in a free country. If the tax had been
considerable, it would have oppressed the small, and forced al-

pated. Some of them acquired the property of landed estates, which
they held by some base or ignoble tenure, sometimes under the

most the whole retail trade into the hands of the great dealers. The
competition of the former being taken away, the latter would have

king, and sometimes under some other great lord, like the ancient
copy-holders of England. Others, without acquiring the property,

enjoyed a monopoly of the trade; and, like all other monopolists,
would soon have combined to raise their profits much beyond

obtained leases for terms of years, of the lands which they occupied under their lord, and thus became less dependent upon him.

what was necessary for the payment of the tax. The final payment,
instead of falling upon the shop-keeper, would have fallen upon

The great lords seem to have beheld the degree of prosperity and
independency, which this inferior order of men had thus come to

the consumer, with a considerable overcharge to the profit of the
shop-keeper. For these reasons, the project of a tax upon shops

enjoy, with a malignant and contemptuous indignation, and willingly consented that the sovereign should tax them. In some coun-

was laid aside, and in the room of it was substituted the subsidy,
1759.

tries, this tax was confined to the lands which were held in property by an ignoble tenure; and, in this case, the taille was said to be

What in France is called the personal taille, is perhaps, the most
important tax upon the profits of stock employed in agriculture,

real. The land tax established by the late king of Sardinia, and the
taille in the provinces of Languedoc, Provence, Dauphine, and

that is levied in any part of Europe.

Britanny; in the generality of Montauban, and in the elections of

701

The Wealth of Nations
Agen and Condom, as well as in some other districts of France;
are taxes upon lands held in property by an ignoble tenure. In

posed upon the whole generality is divided among those different
elections, varies likewise from year to year, according to the re-

other countries, the tax was laid upon the supposed profits of all
those who held, in farm or lease, lands belonging to other people,

ports made to the council concerning their respective abilities. It
seems impossible, that the council, with the best intentions, can

whatever might be the tenure by which the proprietor held them;
and in this case, the taille was said to be personal. In the greater

ever proportion, with tolerable exactness, either of these two assessments to the real abilities of the province or district upon which

part of those provinces of France, which are called the countries of
elections, the taille is of this kind. The real taille, as it is imposed

they are respectively laid. Ignorance and misinformation must always, more or less, mislead the most upright council. The propor-

only upon a part of the lands of the country, is necessarily an
unequal, but it is not always an arbitrary tax, though it is so upon

tion which each parish ought to support of what is assessed upon
the whole election, and that which each individual ought to sup-

some occasions. The personal taille, as it is intended to be proportioned to the profits of a certain class of people, which can only be

port of what is assessed upon his particular parish, are both in the
same manner varied from year to year, according as circumstances

guessed at, is necessarily both arbitrary and unequal.
In France, the personal taille at present (1775) annually im-

are supposed to require. These circumstances are judged of, in the
one case, by the officers of the election, in the other, by those of

posed upon the twenty generalities, called the countries of elections, amounts to 40,107,239 livres, 16 sous. {Memoires

the parish; and both the one and the other are, more or less, under
the direction and influence of the intendant. Not only ignorance

concernant les Droits, etc tom. ii, p.17.} the proportion in which
this sum is assessed upon those different provinces, varies from

and misinformation, but friendship, party animosity, and private
resentment, are said frequently to mislead such assessors. No man

year to year, according to the reports which are made to the king’s
council concerning the goodness or badness of the crops, as well

subject to such a tax, it is evident, can ever be certain, before he is
assessed, of what he is to pay. He cannot even be certain after he is

as other circumstances, which may either increase or diminish their
respective abilities to pay. Each generality is divided into a certain

assessed. If any person has been taxed who ought to have been
exempted, or if any person has been taxed beyond his proportion,

number of elections; and the proportion in which the sum im-

though both must pay in the mean time, yet if they complain, and

702

Adam Smith
make good their complaints, the whole parish is reimposed next
year, in order to reimburse them. If any of the contributors be-

of land, for which he pays rent. For the proper cultivation of this
land, a certain quantity of stock is necessary; and by withdrawing

come bankrupt or insolvent, the collector is obliged to advance
his tax; and the whole parish is reimposed next year, in order to

any part of this necessary quantity, the farmer is not likely to be
more able to pay either the rent or the tax. In order to pay the tax,

reimburse the collector. If the collector himself should become
bankrupt, the parish which elects him must answer for his con-

it can never be his interest to diminish the quantity of his produce, nor consequently to supply the market more sparingly than

duct to the receiver-general of the election. But, as it might be
troublesome for the receiver to prosecute the whole parish, he takes

before. The tax, therefore, will never enable him to raise the price
of his produce, so as to reimburse himself, by throwing the final

at his choice five or six of the richest contributors, and obliges
them to make good what had been lost by the insolvency of the

payment upon the consumer. The farmer, however, must have his
reasonable profit as well as every other dealer, otherwise he must

collector. The parish is afterwards reimposed, in order to reimburse those five or six. Such reimpositions are always over and

give up the trade. After the imposition of a tax of this kind, he can
get this reasonable profit only by paying less rent to the landlord.

above the taille of the particular year in which they are laid on.
When a tax is imposed upon the profits of stock in a particular

The more he is obliged to pay in the way of tax, the less he can
afford to pay in the way of rent. A tax of this kind, imposed dur-

branch of trade, the traders are all careful to bring no more goods
to market than what they can sell at a price sufficient to reimburse

ing the currency of a lease, may, no doubt, distress or ruin the
farmer. Upon the renewal of the lease, it must always fall upon the

them from advancing the tax. Some of them withdraw a part of
their stocks from the trade, and the market is more sparingly sup-

landlord.
In the countries where the personal taille takes place, the farmer

plied than before. The price of the goods rises, and the final payment of the tax falls upon the consumer. But when a tax is im-

is commonly assessed in proportion to the stock which he appears
to employ in cultivation. He is, upon this account, frequently afraid

posed upon the profits of stock employed in agriculture, it is not
the interest of the farmers to withdraw any part of their stock

to have a good team of horses or oxen, but endeavours to cultivate
with the meanest and most wretched instruments of husbandry

from that employment. Each farmer occupies a certain quantity

that he can. Such is his distrust in the justice of his assessors, that

703

The Wealth of Nations
he counterfeits poverty, and wishes to appear scarce able to pay
anything, for fear of being obliged to pay too much. By this mis-

vation, seem anciently to have been common all over Europe. There
subsists at present a tax of this kind in the empire of Russia. It is

erable policy, he does not, perhaps, always consult his own interest in the most effectual manner; and he probably loses more by

probably upon this account that poll-taxes of all kinds have often
been represented as badges of slavery. Every tax, however, is, to the

the diminution of his produce, than he saves by that of his tax.
Though, in consequence of this wretched cultivation, the market

person who pays it, a badge, not of slavery, but of liberty. It denotes that he is subject to government, indeed; but that, as he has

is, no doubt, somewhat worse supplied; yet the small rise of price
which this may occasion, as it is not likely even to indemnify the

some property, he cannot himself be the property of a master. A
poll tax upon slaves is altogether different from a poll-tax upon

farmer for the diminution of his produce, it is still less likely to
enable him to pay more rent to the landlord. The public, the farmer,

freemen. The latter is paid by the persons upon whom it is imposed; the former, by a different set of persons. The latter is either

the landlord, all suffer more or less by this degraded cultivation.
That the personal taille tends, in many different ways, to discour-

altogether arbitrary, or altogether unequal, and, in most cases, is
both the one and the other; the former, though in some respects

age cultivation, and consequently to dry up the principal source
of the wealth of every great country, I have already had occasion

unequal, different slaves being of different values, is in no respect
arbitrary. Every master, who knows the number of his own slaves,

to observe in the third book of this Inquiry.
What are called poll-taxes in the southern provinces of North

knows exactly what he has to pay. Those different taxes, however,
being called by the same name, have been considered as of the

America, and the West India islands, annual taxes of so much ahead upon every negro, are properly taxes upon the profits of a

same nature.
The taxes which in Holland are imposed upon men and maid

certain species of stock employed in agriculture. As the planters,
are the greater part of them, both farmers and landlords, the final

servants, are taxes, not upon stock, but upon expense; and so far
resemble the taxes upon consumable commodities. The tax of a

payment of the tax falls upon them in their quality of landlords,
without any retribution.

guinea a-head for every man-servant, which has lately been imposed in Great Britain, is of the same kind. It falls heaviest upon

Taxes of so much a head upon the bondmen employed in culti-

the middling rank. A man of two hundred a-year may keep a single

704

Adam Smith
man-servant. A man of ten thousand a-year will not keep fifty. It
does not affect the poor.

APPENDIX TO ARTICLES I. AND II. — Taxes upon the
Capital Value of Lands, Houses, and Stock.

Taxes upon the profits of stock, in particular employments, can
never affect the interest of money. Nobody will lend his money

While property remains in the possession of the same person,

for less interest to those who exercise the taxed, than to those who
exercise the untaxed employments. Taxes upon the revenue aris-

whatever permanent taxes may have been imposed upon it, they
have never been intended to diminish or take away any part of its

ing from stock in all employments, where the government attempts
to levy them with any degree of exactness, will, in many cases, fall

capital value, but only some part of the revenue arising from it.
But when property changes hands, when it is transmitted either

upon the interest of money. The vingtieme, or twentieth penny, in
France, is a tax of the same kind with what is called the land tax in

from the dead to the living, or from the living to the living, such
taxes have frequently been imposed upon it as necessarily take

England, and is assessed, in the same manner, upon the revenue
arising upon land, houses, and stock. So far as it affects stock, it is

away some part of its capital value.
The transference of all sorts of property from the dead to the

assessed, though not with great rigour, yet with much more exactness than that part of the land tax in England which is imposed

living, and that of immoveable property of land and houses from
the living to the living, are transactions which are in their nature

upon the same fund. It, in many cases, falls altogether upon the
interest of money. Money is frequently sunk in France, upon what

either public and notorious, or such as cannot be long concealed.
Such transactions, therefore, may be taxed directly. The transfer-

are called contracts for the constitution of a rent; that is, perpetual
annuities, redeemable at any time by the debtor, upon payment of

ence of stock or moveable property, from the living to the living,
by the lending of money, is frequently a secret transaction, and

the sum originally advanced, but of which this redemption is not
exigible by the creditor except in particular cases. The vingtieme

may always be made so. It cannot easily, therefore, be taxed directly. It has been taxed indirectly in two different ways; first, by

seems not to have raised the rate of those annuities, though it is
exactly levied upon them all.

requiring that the deed, containing the obligation to repay, should
be written upon paper or parchment which had paid a certain
stamp duty, otherwise not to be valid; secondly, by requiring, un-

705

The Wealth of Nations
der the like penalty of invalidity, that it should be recorded either
in a public or secret register, and by imposing certain duties upon

sion of ascendants to descendants, to the twentieth penny only.
Direct successions, or those of descendants to ascendants, pay no

such registration. Stamp duties, and duties of registration, have
frequently been imposed likewise upon the deeds transferring prop-

tax. The death of a father, to such of his children as live in the
same house with him, is seldom attended with any increase, and

erty of all kinds from the dead to the living, and upon those transferring immoveable property from the living to the living; trans-

frequently with a considerable diminution of revenue; by the loss
of his industry, of his office, or of some life-rent estate, of which

actions which might easily have been taxed directly.
The vicesima hereditatum, or the twentieth penny of inherit-

he may have been in possession. That tax would be cruel and oppressive, which aggravated their loss, by taking from them any part

ances, imposed by Augustus upon the ancient Romans, was a tax
upon the transference of property from the dead to the living.

of his succession. It may, however, sometimes be otherwise with
those children, who, in the language of the Roman law, are said to

Dion Cassius, { Lib. 55. See also Burman. de Vectigalibus Pop.
Rom. cap. xi. and Bouchaud de l’impot du vingtieme sur les suc-

be emancipated; in that of the Scotch law, to be foris-familiated;
that is, who have received their portion, have got families of their

cessions.} the author who writes concerning it the least indistinctly,
says, that it was imposed upon all successions, legacies and dona-

own, and are supported by funds separate and independent of those
of their father. Whatever part of his succession might come to such

tions, in case of death, except upon those to the nearest relations,
and to the poor.

children, would be a real addition to their fortune, and might, therefore, perhaps, without more inconveniency than what attends all

Of the same kind is the Dutch tax upon successions. {See
Memoires concernant les Droits, etc. tom i, p. 225.} Collateral

duties of this kind, be liable to some tax.
The casualties of the feudal law were taxes upon the transfer-

successions are taxed according to the degree of relation, from five
to thirty per cent. upon the whole value of the succession. Testa-

ence of land, both from the dead to the living, and from the living
to the living. In ancient times, they constituted, in every part of

mentary donations, or legacies to collaterals, are subject to the like
duties. Those from husband to wife, or from wife to husband, to

Europe, one of the principal branches of the revenue of the crown.
The heir of every immediate vassal of the crown paid a certain

the fiftieth penny. The luctuosa hereditas, the mournful succes-

duty, generally a year’s rent, upon receiving the investiture of the

706

Adam Smith
estate. If the heir was a minor, the whole rents of the estate, during
the continuance of the minority, devolved to the superior, without

sells his land in order to remove out of the territory, he pays ten
per cent. upon the whole price of the sale. {id. p.157.} Taxes of the

any other charge besides the maintenance of the minor, and the
payment of the widow’s dower, when there happened to be a dowa-

same kind, upon the sale either of all lands, or of lands held by
certain tenures, take place in many other countries, and make a

ger upon the land. When the minor came to de of age, another tax,
called relief, was still due to the superior, which generally amounted

more or less considerable branch of the revenue of the sovereign.
Such transactions may be taxed indirectly, by means either of

likewise to a year’s rent. A long minority, which, in the present times,
so frequently disburdens a great estate of all its incumbrances, and

stamp duties, or of duties upon registration; and those duties either may, or may not, be proportioned to the value of the subject

restores the family to their ancient splendour, could in those times
have no such effect. The waste, and not the disincumbrance of the

which is transferred.
In Great Britain, the stamp duties are higher or lower, not so

estate, was the common effect of a long minority.
By a feudal law, the vassal could not alienate without the con-

much according to the value of the property transferred (an eighteen-penny or half-crown stamp being sufficient upon a bond for

sent of his superior, who generally extorted a fine or composition
on granting it. This fine, which was at first arbitrary, came, in

the largest sum of money), as according to the nature of the deed.
The highest do not exceed six pounds upon every sheet of paper,

many countries, to be regulated at a certain portion of the price of
the land. In some countries, where the greater part of the other

or skin of parchment; and these high duties fall chiefly upon grants
from the crown, and upon certain law proceedings, without any

feudal customs have gone into disuse, this tax upon the alienation
of land still continues to make a very considerable branch of the

regard to the value of the subject. There are, in Great Britain, no
duties on the registration of deeds or writings, except the fees of

revenue of the sovereign. In the canton of Berne it is so high as a
sixth part of the price of all noble fiefs, and a tenth part of that of

the officers who keep the register; and these are seldom more than
a reasonable recompence for their labour. The crown derives no

all ignoble ones. {Memoires concernant les Droits, etc, tom.i p.154}
In the canton of Lucern, the tax upon the sale of land is not uni-

revenue from them.
In Holland {Memoires concernant les Droits, etc. tom. i. p 223,

versal, and takes place only in certain districts. But if any person

224, 225.} there are both stamp duties and duties upon registra-

707

The Wealth of Nations
tion; which in some cases are, and in some are not, proportioned
to the value of the property transferred. All testaments must be

the excise officers. The latter are considered as a branch of the
domain of the crown and are levied by a different set of officers.

written upon stamped paper, of which the price is proportioned
to the property disposed of; so that there are stamps which cost

Those modes of taxation by stamp duties and by duties upon
registration, are of very modern invention. In the course of little

from three pence or three stivers a-sheet, to three hundred florins,
equal to about twenty-seven pounds ten shillings of our money. If

more than a century, however, stamp duties have, in Europe, become almost universal, and duties upon registration extremely com-

the stamp is of an inferior price to what the testator ought to have
made use of, his succession is confiscated. This is over and above

mon. There is no art which one government sooner learns of another, than that of draining money from the pockets of the people.

all their other taxes on succession. Except bills of exchange, and
some other mercantile bills, all other deeds, bonds, and contracts,

Taxes upon the transference of property from the dead to the
living, fall finally, as well as immediately, upon the persons to whom

are subject to a stamp duty. This duty, however, does not rise in
proportion to the value of the subject. All sales of land and of

the property is transferred. Taxes upon the sale of land fall altogether upon the seller. The seller is almost always under the neces-

houses, and all mortgages upon either, must be registered, and,
upon registration, pay a duty to the state of two and a-half per

sity of selling, and must, therefore, take such a price as he can get.
The buyer is scarce ever under the necessity of buying, and will,

cent. upon the amount of the price or of the mortgage. This duty
is extended to the sale of all ships and vessels of more than two

therefore, only give such a price as he likes. He considers what the
land will cost him, in tax and price together. The more he is obliged

tons burden, whether decked or undecked. These, it seems, are
considered as a sort of houses upon the water. The sale of moveables,

to pay in the way of tax, the less he will be disposed to give in the
way of price. Such taxes, therefore, fall almost always upon a ne-

when it is ordered by a court of justice, is subject to the like duty
of two and a-half per cent.

cessitous person, and must, therefore, be frequently very cruel and
oppressive. Taxes upon the sale of new-built houses, where the

In France, there are both stamp duties and duties upon registration. The former are considered as a branch of the aids of excise,

building is sold without the ground, fall generally upon the buyer,
because the builder must generally have his profit; otherwise he

and, in the provinces where those duties take place, are levied by

must give up the trade. If he advances the tax, therefore, the buyer

708

Adam Smith
must generally repay it to him. Taxes upon the sale of old houses,
for the same reason as those upon the sale of land, fall generally

They are all more or less unthrifty taxes that increase the revenue
of the sovereign, which seldom maintains any but unproductive

upon the seller; whom, in most cases, either conveniency or necessity obliges to sell. The number of new-built houses that are

labourers, at the expense of the capital of the people, which maintains none but productive.

annually brought to market, is more or less regulated by the demand. Unless the demand is such as to afford the builder his profit,

Such taxes, even when they are proportioned to the value of the

after paying all expenses, he will build no more houses. The number of old houses which happen at any time to come to market, is

property transferred, are still unequal; the frequency of transference not being always equal in property of equal value. When

regulated by accidents, of which the greater part have no relation
to the demand. Two or three great bankruptcies in a mercantile

they are not proportioned to this value, which is the case with the
greater part of the stamp duties and duties of registration, they are

town, will bring many houses to sale, which must be sold for what
can be got for them. Taxes upon the sale of ground-rents fall alto-

still more so. They are in no respect arbitrary, but are, or may be,
in all cases, perfectly clear and certain. Though they sometimes

gether upon the seller, for the same reason as those upon the sale
of lands. Stamp duties, and duties upon the registration of bonds

fall upon the person who is not very able to pay, the time of payment is, in most cases, sufficiently convenient for him. When the

and contracts for borrowed money, fall altogether upon the borrower, and, in fact, are always paid by him. Duties of the same

payment becomes due, he must, in most cases, have the more to
pay. They are levied at very little expense, and in general subject

kind upon law proceedings fall upon the suitors. They reduce to
both the capital value of the subject in dispute. The more it costs

the contributors to no other inconveniency, besides always the
unavoidable one of paying the tax.

to acquire any property, the less must be the neat value of it when
acquired.

In France, the stamp duties are not much complained of. Those
of registration, which they call the Controle, are. They give occa-

All taxes upon the transference of property of every kind, so far
as they diminish the capital value of that property, tend to dimin-

sion, it is pretended, to much extortion in the officers of the farmers-general who collect the tax, which is in a great measure arbi-

ish the funds destined for the maintenance of productive labour.

trary and uncertain. In the greater part of the libels which have

709

The Wealth of Nations
been written against the present system of finances in France, the
abuses of the controle make a principal article. Uncertainty, how-

upon newspapers and periodical pamphlets, etc. are properly taxes
upon consumption; the final payment falls upon the persons who

ever, does not seem to be necessarily inherent in the nature of such
taxes. If the popular complaints are well founded, the abuse must

use or consume such commodities. Such stamp duties as those
upon licences to retail ale, wine, and spiritous liquors, though

arise, not so much from the nature of the tax as from the want of
precision and distinctness in the words of the edicts or laws which

intended, perhaps, to fall upon the profits of the retailers, are likewise finally paid by the consumers of those liquors. Such taxes,

impose it.
The registration of mortgages, and in general of all rights upon

though called by the same name, and levied by the same officers,
and in the same manner with the stamp duties above mentioned

immoveable property, as it gives great security both to creditors
and purchasers, is extremely advantageous to the public. That of

upon the transference of property, are, however, of a quite different nature, and fall upon quite different funds.

the greater part of deeds of other kinds, is frequently inconvenient
and even dangerous to individuals, without any advantage to the
public. All registers which, it is acknowledged, ought to be kept
secret, ought certainly never to exist. The credit of individuals

ARTICLE III. — Taxes upon the Wages of Labour.
The wages of the inferior classes of work men, I have endeavoured to show in the first book are everywhere necessarily regu-

ought certainly never to depend upon so very slender a security, as
the probity and religion of the inferior officers of revenue. But

lated by two different circumstances; the demand for labour, and
the ordinary or average price of provisions. The demand for labour,

where the fees of registration have been made a source of revenue
to the sovereign, register-offices have commonly been multiplied

according as it happens to be either increasing stationary or declining; or to require an increasing, stationary, or declining popu-

without end, both for the deeds which ought to be registered, and
for those which ought not. In France there are several different

lation, regulates the subsistence of the labourer, and determines in
what degree it shall be either liberal, moderate, or scanty. The

sorts of secret registers. This abuse, though not perhaps a necessary, it must be acknowledged, is a very natural effect of such taxes.

ordinary average price of provisions determines the quantity of
money which must be paid to the workman, in order to enable

Such stamp duties as those in England upon cards and dice,

him, one year with another, to purchase this liberal, moderate, or

710

Adam Smith
scanty subsistence. While the demand for the labour and the price
of provisions, therefore, remain the same, a direct tax upon the

erly be said to be even advanced by him; at least if the demand for
labour and the average price of provisions remained the same after

wages of labour can have no other effect, than to raise them somewhat higher than the tax. Let us suppose, for example, that, in a

the tax as before it. In all such cases, not only the tax, but something more than the tax, would in reality be advanced by the per-

particular place, the demand for labour and the price of provisions were such as to render ten shillings a-week the ordinary wages

son who immediately employed him. The final payment would,
in different cases, fall upon different persons. The rise which such

of labour; and that a tax of one-fifth, or four shillings in the pound,
was imposed upon wages. If the demand for labour and the price

a tax might occasion in the wages of manufacturing labour would
be advanced by the master manufacturer, who would both be en-

of provisions remained the same, it would still be necessary that
the labourer should, in that place, earn such a subsistence as could

titled and obliged to charge it, with a profit, upon the price of his
goods. The final payment of this rise of wages, therefore, together

be bought only for ten shillings a-week; so that, after paying the
tax, he should have ten shillings a-week free wages. But, in order

with the additional profit of the master manufacturer would fall
upon the consumer. The rise which such a tax might occasion in

to leave him such free wages, after paying such a tax, the price of
labour must, in that place, soon rise, not to twelve shillings a week

the wages of country labour would be advanced by the farmer,
who, in order to maintain the same number of labourers as be-

only, but to twelve and sixpence; that is, in order to enable him to
pay a tax of one-fifth, his wages must necessarily soon rise, not

fore, would be obliged to employ a greater capital. In order to get
back this greater capital, together with the ordinary profits of stock,

one-fifth part only, but one-fourth. Whatever was the proportion
of the tax, the wages of labour must, in all cases rise, not only in

it would be necessary that he should retain a larger portion, or,
what comes to the same thing, the price of a larger portion, of the

that proportion, but in a higher proportion. If the tax for example,
was one-tenth, the wages of labour must necessarily soon rise, not

produce of the land, and, consequently, that he should pay less
rent to the landlord. The final payment of this rise of wages, there-

one-tenth part only, but one-eighth.
A direct tax upon the wages of labour, therefore, though the

fore, would, in this case, fall upon the landlord, together with the
additional profit of the farmer who had advanced it. In all cases, a

labourer might, perhaps, pay it out of his hand, could not prop-

direct tax upon the wages of labour must, in the long-run, occa-

711

The Wealth of Nations
sion both a greater reduction in the rent of land, and a greater rise
in the price of manufactured goods than would have followed

try villages, is properly a tax of this kind. Their wages are computed according to the common rate of the district in which they

from the proper assessment of a sum equal to the produce of the
tax, partly upon the rent of land, and partly upon consumable

reside; and, that they may be as little liable as possible to any overcharge, their yearly gains are estimated at no more than two hun-

commodities.
If direct taxes upon the wages of labour have not always occa-

dred working days in the year. {Memoires concernant les Droits,
etc. tom. ii. p. 108.} The tax of each individual is varied from year

sioned a proportionable rise in those wages, it is because they have
generally occasioned a considerable fall in the demand of labour.

to year, according to different circumstances, of which the collector or the commissary, whom intendant appoints to assist him,

The declension of industry, the decrease of employment for the
poor, the diminution of the annual produce of the land and labour

are the judges. In Bohemia, in consequence of the alteration in
the system of finances which was begun in 1748, a very heavy tax

of the country, have generally been the effects of such taxes. In
consequence of them, however, the price of labour must always be

is imposed upon the industry of artificers. They are divided into
four classes. The highest class pay a hundred florins a year, which,

higher than it otherwise would have been in the actual state of the
demand; and this enhancement of price, together with the profit

at two-and-twenty pence half penny a-florin, amounts to £9:7:6.
The second class are taxed at seventy; the third at fifty; and the

of those who advance it, must always be finally paid by the landlords and consumers.

fourth, comprehending artificers in villages, and the lowest class
of those in towns, at twenty-five florins. {Memoires concemant

A tax upon the wages of country labour does not raise the price
of the rude produce of land in proportion to the tax; for the same

les Droits, etc. tom. iii. p. 87.}
The recompence of ingenious artists, and of men of liberal pro-

reason that a tax upon the farmer’s profit does not raise that price
in that proportion.

fessions, I have endeavoured to show in the first book, necessarily
keeps a certain proportion to the emoluments of inferior trades. A

Absurd and destructive as such taxes are, however, they take
place in many countries. In France, that part of the taille which is

tax upon this recompence, therefore, could have no other effect
than to raise it somewhat higher than in proportion to the tax. If

charged upon the industry of workmen and day-labourers in coun-

it did not rise in this manner, the ingenious arts and the liberal

712

Adam Smith
professions, being; no longer upon a level with other trades, would
be so much deserted, that they would soon return to that level.

ARTICLE IV. — Taxes which it is intended should fall indifferently upon every different Species of Revenue.

The emoluments of offices are not, like those of trades and professions, regulated by the free competition of the market, and do

The taxes which it is intended should fall indifferently upon
every different species of revenue, are capitation taxes, and taxes

not, therefore, always bear a just proportion to what the nature of
the employment requires. They are, perhaps, in most countries,

upon consumable commodities. Those must be paid indifferently,
from whatever revenue the contributors may possess; from the

higher than it requires; the persons who have the administration
of government being generally disposed to regard both themselves

rent of their land, from the profits of their stock, or from the
wages of their labour.

and their immediate dependents, rather more than enough. The
emoluments of offices, therefore, can, in most cases, very well bear

Capitation Taxes.

to be taxed. The persons, besides, who enjoy public offices, especially the more lucrative, are, in all countries, the objects of gen-

Capitation taxes, if it is attempted to proportion them to the for-

eral envy; and a tax upon their emoluments, even though it should
be somewhat higher than upon any other sort of revenue, is al-

tune or revenue of each contributor, become altogether arbitrary.
The state of a man’s fortune varies from day to day; and, without

ways a very popular tax. In England, for example, when, by the
land-tax, every other sort of revenue was supposed to be assessed

an inquisition, more intolerable than any tax, and renewed at least
once every year, can only be guessed at. His assessment, therefore,

at four shillings in the pound, it was very popular to lay a real tax
of five shillings and sixpence in the pound upon the salaries of

must, in most cases, depend upon the good or bad humour of his
assessors, and must, therefore, be altogether arbitrary and uncer-

offices which exceeded a hundred pounds a-year; the pensions of
the younger branches of the royal family, the pay of the officers of

tain.
Capitation taxes, if they are proportioned, not to the supposed

the army and navy, and a few others less obnoxious to envy, excepted. There are in England no other direct taxes upon the wages

fortune, but to the rank of each contributor, become altogether
unequal; the degrees of fortune being frequently unequal in the

of labour.

same degree of rank.

713

The Wealth of Nations
Such taxes, therefore, if it is attempted to render them equal,
become altogether arbitrary and uncertain; and if it is attempted

interruption, since the beginning of the present century, the highest orders of people are rated according to their rank, by an invari-

to render them certain and not arbitrary, become altogether unequal. Let the tax be light or heavy, uncertainty is always a great

able tariff; the lower orders of people, according to what is supposed to be their fortune, by an assessment which varies from year

grievance. In a light tax, a considerable degree of inequality may
be supported; in a heavy one, it is altogether intolerable.

to year. The officers of the king’s court, the judges, and other officers in the superior courts of justice, the officers of the troops,

In the different poll-taxes which took place in England during
the reign of William III. the contributors were, the greater part of

etc are assessed in the first manner. The inferior ranks of people in
the provinces are assessed in the second. In France, the great easily

them, assessed according to the degree of their rank; as dukes,
marquises, earls, viscounts, barons, esquires, gentlemen, the el-

submit to a considerable degree of inequality in a tax which, so far
as it affects them, is not a very heavy one; but could not brook the

dest and youngest sons of peers, etc. All shop-keepers and tradesmen worth more than three hundred pounds, that is, the better

arbitrary assessment of an intendant.
The inferior ranks of people must, in that country, suffer pa-

sort of them, were subject to the same assessment, how great soever
might be the difference in their fortunes. Their rank was more

tiently the usage which their superiors think proper to give them.
In England, the different poll-taxes never produced the sum

considered than their fortune. Several of those who, in the first
poll-tax, were rated according to their supposed fortune were af-

which had been expected from them, or which it was supposed
they might have produced, had they been exactly levied. In France,

terwards rated according to their rank. Serjeants, attorneys, and
proctors at law, who, in the first poll-tax, were assessed at three

the capitation always produces the sum expected from it. The mild
government of England, when it assessed the different ranks of

shillings in the pound of their supposed income, were afterwards
assessed as gentlemen. In the assessment of a tax which was not

people to the poll-tax, contented itself with what that assessment
happened to produce, and required no compensation for the loss

very heavy, a considerable degree of inequality had been found
less insupportable than any degree of uncertainty.

which the state might sustain, either by those who could not pay,
or by those who would not pay (for there were many such), and

In the capitation which has been levied in France, without-any

who, by the indulgent execution of the law, were not forced to

714

Adam Smith
pay. The more severe government of France assesses upon each
generality a certain sum, which the intendant must find as he can.

upon this account that, in countries where the case, comfort, and
security of the inferior ranks of people are little attended to, capi-

If any province complains of being assessed too high, it may, in
the assessment of next year, obtain an abatement proportioned to

tation taxes are very common. It is in general, however, but a small
part of the public revenue, which, in a great empire, has ever been

the overcharge of the year before; but it must pay in the mean
time. The intendant, in order to be sure of finding the sum as-

drawn from such taxes; and the greatest sum which they have ever
afforded, might always have been found in some other way much

sessed upon his generality, was empowered to assess it in a larger
sum, that the failure or inability of some of the contributors might

more convenient to the people.

be compensated by the overcharge of the rest; and till 1765, the
fixation of this surplus assessment was left altogether to his discre-

Taxes upon Consumable Commodities.

tion. In that year, indeed, the council assumed this power to itself.
In the capitation of the provinces, it is observed by the perfectly

The impossibility of taxing the people, in proportion to their revenue, by any capitation, seems to have given occasion to the in-

well informed author of the Memoirs upon the Impositions in
France, the proportion which falls upon the nobility, and upon

vention of taxes upon consumable commodities. The state not
knowing how to tax, directly and proportionably, the revenue of

those whose privileges exempt them from the taille, is the least
considerable. The largest falls upon those subject to the taille, who

its subjects, endeavours to tax it indirectly by taxing their expense,
which, it is supposed, will, in most cases, be nearly in proportion

are assessed to the capitation at so much a-pound of what they
pay to that other tax.

to their revenue. Their expense is taxed, by taxing the consumable
commodities upon which it is laid out.

Capitation taxes, so far as they are levied upon the lower ranks
of people, are direct taxes upon the wages of labour, and are at-

Consumable commodities are either necessaries or luxuries.
By necessaries I understand, not only the commodities which

tended with all the inconveniencies of such taxes.
Capitation taxes are levied at little expense; and, where they are

are indispensibly necessary for the support of life, but whatever
the custom of the country renders it indecent for creditable people,

rigorously exacted, afford a very sure revenue to the state. It is

even of the lowest order, to be without. A linen shirt, for example,

715

The Wealth of Nations
is, strictly speaking, not a necessary of life. The Greeks and Romans lived, I suppose, very comfortably, though they had no linen.

from tasting such liquors. Nature does not render them necessary
for the support of life; and custom nowhere renders it indecent to

But in the present times, through the greater part of Europe, a
creditable day-labourer would be ashamed to appear in public

live without them.
As the wages of labour are everywhere regulated, partly by the

without a linen shirt, the want of which would be supposed to
denote that disgraceful degree of poverty, which, it is presumed,

demand for it, and partly by the average price of the necessary
articles of subsistence; whatever raises this average price must nec-

nobody can well fall into without extreme bad conduct. Custom,
in the same manner, has rendered leather shoes a necessary of life

essarily raise those wages; so that the labourer may still be able to
purchase that quantity of those necessary articles which the state

in England. The poorest creditable person, of either sex, would be
ashamed to appear in public without them. In Scotland, custom

of the demand for labour, whether increasing, stationary, or declining, requires that he should have. {See book i.chap. 8} A tax

has rendered them a necessary of life to the lowest order of men;
but not to the same order of women, who may, without any dis-

upon those articles necessarily raises their price somewhat higher
than the amount of the tax, because the dealer, who advances the

credit, walk about barefooted. In France, they are necessaries neither to men nor to women; the lowest rank of both sexes appear-

tax, must generally get it back, with a profit. Such a tax must,
therefore, occasion a rise in the wages of labour, proportionable to

ing there publicly, without any discredit, sometimes in wooden
shoes, and sometimes barefooted. Under necessaries, therefore, I

this rise of price.
It is thus that a tax upon the necessaries of life operates exactly

comprehend, not only those things which nature, but those things
which the established rules of decency have rendered necessary to

in the same manner as a direct tax upon the wages of labour. The
labourer, though he may pay it out of his hand, cannot, for any

the lowest rank of people. All other things I call luxuries, without
meaning, by this appellation, to throw the smallest degree of re-

considerable time at least, be properly said even to advance it. It
must always, in the long-run, be advanced to him by his immedi-

proach upon the temperate use of them. Beer and ale, for example,
in Great Britain, and wine, even in the wine countries, I call luxu-

ate employer, in the advanced state of wages. His employer, if he is
a manufacturer, will charge upon the price of his goods the rise of

ries. A man of any rank may, without any reproach, abstain totally

wages, together with a profit, so that the final payment of the tax,

716

Adam Smith
together with this overcharge, will fall upon the consumer. If his
employer is a farmer, the final payment, together with a like over-

lies. Upon the sober and industrious poor, taxes upon such commodities act as sumptuary laws, and dispose them either to mod-

charge, will fall upon the rent of the landlord.
It is otherwise with taxes upon what I call luxuries, even upon

erate, or to refrain altogether from the use of superfluities which
they can no longer easily afford. Their ability to bring up families,

those of the poor. The rise in the price of the taxed commodities,
will not necessarily occasion any rise in the wages of labour. A tax

in consequence of this forced frugality, instead of being diminished, is frequently, perhaps, increased by the tax. It is the sober

upon tobacco, for example, though a luxury of the poor, as well as
of the rich, will not raise wages. Though it is taxed in England at

and industrious poor who generally bring up the most numerous
families, and who principally supply the demand for useful labour.

three times, and in France at fifteen times its original price, those
high duties seem to have no effect upon the wages of labour. The

All the poor, indeed, are not sober and industrious; and the dissolute and disorderly might continue to indulge themselves in the

same thing maybe said of the taxes upon tea and sugar, which, in
England and Holland, have become luxuries of the lowest ranks

use of such commodities, after this rise of price, in the same manner as before, without regarding the distress which this indulgence

of people; and of those upon chocolate, which, in Spain, is said to
have become so.

might bring upon their families. Such disorderly persons, however, seldom rear up numerous families, their children generally

The different taxes which, in Great Britain, have, in the course of
the present century, been imposed upon spiritous liquors, are not

perishing from neglect, mismanagement, and the scantiness or
unwholesomeness of their food. If by the strength of their consti-

supposed to have had any effect upon the wages of labour. The rise
in the price of porter, occasioned by an additional tax of three shil-

tution, they survive the hardships to which the bad conduct of
their parents exposes them, yet the example of that bad conduct

lings upon the barrel of strong beer, has not raised the wages of
common labour in London. These were about eighteen pence or

commonly corrupts their morals; so that, instead of being useful
to society by their industry, they become public nuisances by their

twenty pence a-day before the tax, and they are not more now.
The high price of such commodities does not necessarily di-

vices and disorders. Through the advanced price of the luxuries of
the poor, therefore, might increase somewhat the distress of such

minish the ability of the inferior ranks of people to bring up fami-

disorderly families, and thereby diminish somewhat their ability

717

The Wealth of Nations
to bring up children, it would not probably diminish much the
useful population of the country.

sumption of the poor, of coarse woollens, for example, must be
compensated to the poor by a farther advancement of their wages.

Any rise in the average price of necessaries, unless it be compensated by a proportionable rise in the wages of labour, must neces-

The middling and superior ranks of people, if they understood
their own interest, ought always to oppose all taxes upon the nec-

sarily diminish, more or less, the ability of the poor to bring up
numerous families, and, consequently, to supply the demand for

essaries of life, as well as all taxes upon the wages of labour. The
final payment of both the one and the other falls altogether upon

useful labour; whatever may be the state of that demand, whether
increasing, stationary, or declining; or such as requires an increas-

themselves, and always with a considerable overcharge. They fall
heaviest upon the landlords, who always pay in a double capacity;

ing, stationary, or declining population.
Taxes upon luxuries have no tendency to raise the price of any

in that of landlords, by the reduction, of their rent; and in that of
rich consumers, by the increase of their expense. The observation

other commodities, except that of the commodities taxed. Taxes
upon necessaries, by raising the wages of labour, necessarily tend

of Sir Matthew Decker, that certain taxes are, in the price of certain goods, sometimes repeated and accumulated four or five times,

to raise the price of all manufactures, and consequently to diminish the extent of their sale and consumption. Taxes upon luxuries

is perfectly just with regard to taxes upon the necessaries of life. In
the price of leather, for example, you must pay not only for the tax

are finally paid by the consumers of the commodities taxed, without any retribution. They fall indifferently upon every species of

upon the leather of your own shoes, but for a part of that upon
those of the shoemaker and the tanner. You must pay, too, for the

revenue, the wages of labour, the profits of stock, and the rent of
land. Taxes upon necessaries, so far as they affect the labouring

tax upon the salt, upon the soap, and upon the candles which
those workmen consume while employed in your service; and for

poor, are finally paid, partly by landlords, in the diminished rent
of their lands, and partly by rich consumers, whether landlords or

the tax upon the leather, which the saltmaker, the soap-maker,
and the candle-maker consume, while employed in their service.

others, in the advanced price of manufactured goods; and always
with a considerable overcharge. The advanced price of such manu-

In Great Britain, the principal taxes upon the necessaries of life,
are those upon the four commodities just now mentioned, salt,

factures as are real necessaries of life, and are destined for the con-

leather, soap, and candles.

718

Adam Smith
Salt is a very ancient and a very universal subject of taxation. It
was taxed among the Romans, and it is so at present in, I believe,

for the comfortable subsistence of many different sorts of workmen who work within doors; and coals are the cheapest of all fuel.

every part of Europe. The quantity annually consumed by any
individual is so small, and may be purchased so gradually, that

The price of fuel has so important an influence upon that of labour,
that all over Great Britain, manufactures have confined themselves

nobody, it seems to have been thought, could feel very sensibly
even a pretty heavy tax upon it. It is in England taxed at three

principally to the coal counties; other parts of the country, on
account of the high price of this necessary article, not being able

shillings and fourpence a bushel; about three times the original
price of the commodity. In some other countries, the tax is still

to work so cheap. In some manufactures, besides, coal is a necessary instrument of trade; as in those of glass, iron, and all other

higher. Leather is a real necessary of life. The use of linen renders
soap such. In countries where the winter nights are long, candles

metals. If a bounty could in any case be reasonable, it might perhaps be so upon the transportation of coals from those parts of

are a necessary instrument of trade. Leather and soap are in Great
Britain taxed at three halfpence a-pound; candles at a penny; taxes

the country in which they abound, to those in which they are
wanted. But the legislature, instead of a bounty, has imposed a tax

which, upon the original price of leather, may amount to about
eight or ten per cent.; upon that of soap, to about twenty or five-

of three shillings and threepence a-ton upon coals carried coastways;
which, upon most sorts of coal, is more than sixty per cent. of the

and-twenty per cent.; and upon that of candles to about fourteen
or fifteen per cent.; taxes which, though lighter than that upon

original price at the coal pit. Coals carried, either by land or by
inland navigation, pay no duty. Where they are naturally cheap,

salt, are still very heavy. As all those four commodities are real
necessaries of life, such heavy taxes upon them must increase some-

they are consumed duty free; where they are naturally dear, they
are loaded with a heavy duty.

what the expense of the sober and industrious poor, and must
consequently raise more or less the wages of their labour.

Such taxes, though they raise the price of subsistence, and consequently the wages of labour, yet they afford a considerable rev-

In a country where the winters are so cold as in Great Britain,
fuel is, during that season, in the strictest sense of the word, a

enue to government, which it might not be easy to find in any
other way. There may, therefore, be good reasons for continuing

necessary of life, not only for the purpose of dressing victuals, but

them. The bounty upon the exportation of corn, so far us it tends,

719

The Wealth of Nations
in the actual state of tillage, to raise the price of that necessary
article, produces all the like bad effects; and instead of affording

halfpenny. Those, and some other taxes of the same kind, by raising the price of labour, are said to have ruined the greater part of

any revenue, frequently occasions a very great expense to government. The high duties upon the importation of foreign corn, which,

the manufactures of Holland {Memoires concernant les Droits,
etc. p. 210, 211.}. Similar taxes, though not quite so heavy, take

in years of moderate plenty, amount to a prohibition; and the
absolute prohibition of the importation, either of live cattle, or of

place in the Milanese, in the states of Genoa, in the duchy of
Modena, in the duchies of Parma, Placentia, and Guastalla, and

salt provisions, which takes place in the ordinary state of the law,
and which, on account of the scarcity, is at present suspended for

the Ecclesiastical state. A French author {Le Reformateur} of some
note, has proposed to reform the finances of his country, by sub-

a limited time with regard to Ireland and the British plantations,
have all had the bad effects of taxes upon the necessaries of life,

stituting in the room of the greater part of other taxes, this most
ruinous of all taxes. There is nothing so absurd, says Cicero, which

and produce no revenue to government. Nothing seems necessary
for the repeal of such regulations, but to convince the public of

has not sometimes been asserted by some philosophers.
Taxes upon butcher’s meat are still more common than those

the futility of that system in consequence of which they have been
established.

upon bread. It may indeed be doubted, whether butcher’s meat is
any where a necessary of life. Grain and other vegetables, with the

Taxes upon the necessaries of life are much higher in many other
countries than in Great Britain. Duties upon flour and meal when

help of milk, cheese, and butter, or oil, where butter is not to be
had, it is known from experience, can, without any butcher’s meat,

ground at the mill, and upon bread when baked at the oven, take
place in many countries. In Holland the money-price of the: bread

afford the most plentiful, the most wholesome, the most nourishing, and the most invigorating diet. Decency nowhere requires

consumed in towns is supposed to be doubled by means of such
taxes. In lieu of a part of them, the people who live in the country,

that any man should eat butcher’s meat, as it in most places requires that he should wear a linen shirt or a pair of leather shoes.

pay every year so much a-head, according to the sort of bread they
are supposed to consume. Those who consume wheaten bread

Consumable commodities, whether necessaries or luxuries, may
be taxed in two different ways. The consumer may either pay an

pay three guilders fifteen stivers; about six shillings and ninepence

annual sum on account of his using or consuming goods of a

720

Adam Smith
certain kind; or the goods may be taxed while they remain in the
hands of the dealer, and before they are delivered to the consumer.

It was the well-known proposal of Sir Matthew Decker, that all
commodities, even those of which the consumption is either im-

The consumable goods which last a considerable time before they
are consumed altogether, are most properly taxed in the one way;

mediate or speedy, should be taxed in this manner; the dealer advancing nothing, but the consumer paying a certain annual sum

those of which the consumption is either immediate or more
speedy, in the other. The coach-tax and plate tax are examples of

for the licence to consume certain goods. The object of his scheme
was to promote all the different branches of foreign trade, par-

the former method of imposing; the greater part of the other duties of excise and customs, of the latter.

ticularly the carrying trade, by taking away all duties upon importation and exportation, and thereby enabling the merchant to

A coach may, with good management, last ten or twelve years. It
might be taxed, once for all, before it comes out of the hands of the

employ his whole capital and credit in the purchase of goods and
the freight of ships, no part of either being diverted towards the

coach-maker. But it is certainly more convenient for the buyer to
pay four pounds a-year for the privilege of keeping a coach, than to

advancing of taxes, The project, however, of taxing, in this manner, goods of immediate or speedy consumption, seems liable to

pay all at once forty or forty-eight pounds additional price to the
coach-maker; or a sum equivalent to what the tax is likely to cost

the four following very important objections. First, the tax would
be more unequal, or not so well proportioned to the expense and

him during the time he uses the same coach. A service of plate in the
same manner, may last more than a century. It is certainly-easier for

consumption of the different contributors, as in the way in which
it is commonly imposed. The taxes upon ale, wine, and spiritous

the consumer to pay five shillings a-year for every hundred ounces
of plate, near one per cent. of the value, than to redeem this long

liquors, which are advanced by the dealers, are finally paid by the
different consumers, exactly in proportion to their respective con-

annuity at five-and-twenty or thirty years purchase, which would
enhance the price at least five-and-twenty or thirty per cent. The

sumption. But if the tax were to be paid by purchasing a licence to
drink those liquors, the sober would, in proportion to his con-

different taxes which affect houses, are certainly more conveniently
paid by moderate annual payments, than by a heavy tax of equal

sumption, be taxed much more heavily than the drunken consumer. A family which exercised great hospitality, would be taxed

value upon the first building or sale of the house.

much more lightly than one who entertained fewer guests. Sec-

721

The Wealth of Nations
ondly, this mode of taxation, by paying for an annual, half-yearly,
or quarterly licence to consume certain goods, would diminish

duce a revenue nearly equal to what is derived from the present
mode without any oppression. In several countries, however, com-

very much one of the principal conveniences of taxes upon goods
of speedy consumption; the piece-meal payment. In the price of

modities of an immediate or very speedy consumption are taxed
in this manner. In Holland, people pay so much a-head for a li-

threepence halfpenny, which is at present paid for a pot of porter,
the different taxes upon malt, hops, and beer, together with the

cence to drink tea. I have already mentioned a tax upon bread,
which, so far as it is consumed in farm houses and country vil-

extraordinary profit which the brewer charges for having advanced
than, may perhaps amount to about three halfpence. If a work-

lages, is there levied in the same manner.
The duties of excise are imposed chiefly upon goods of home

man can conveniently spare those three halfpence, he buys a pot
of porter. If he cannot, he contents himself with a pint; and, as a

produce, destined for home consumption. They are imposed only
upon a few sorts of goods of the most general use. There can never

penny saved is a penny got, he thus gains a farthing by his temperance. He pays the tax piece-meal, as he can afford to pay it, and

be any doubt, either concerning the goods which are subject to
those duties, or concerning the particular duty which each species

when he can afford to pay it, and every act of payment is perfectly
voluntary, and what he can avoid if he chuses to do so. Thirdly,

of goods is subject to. They fall almost altogether upon what I call
luxuries, excepting always the four duties above mentioned, upon

such taxes would operate less as sumptuary laws. When the licence was once purchased, whether the purchaser drunk much or

salt, soap, leather, candles, and perhaps that upon green glass.
The duties of customs are much more ancient than those of

drunk little, his tax would be the same. Fourthly, if a workman
were to pay all at once, by yearly, half-yearly, or quarterly pay-

excise. They seem to have been called customs, as denoting customary payments, which had been in use for time immemorial.

ments, a tax equal to what he at present pays, with little or no
inconveniency, upon all the different pots and pints of porter which

They appear to have been originally considered as taxes upon the
profits of merchants. During the barbarous times of feudal anar-

he drinks in any such period of time, the sum might frequently
distress him very much. This mode of taxation, therefore, it seems

chy, merchants, like all the other inhabitants of burghs, were considered as little better than emancipated bondmen, whose persons

evident, could never, without the most grievous oppression, pro-

were despised, and whose gains were envied. The great nobility,

722

Adam Smith
who had consented that the king should tallage the profits of their
own tenants, were not unwilling that he should tallage likewise

wool and leather. It seems to have been chiefly or altogether an
exportation duty. When the woollen manufacture came to be es-

those of an order of men whom it was much less their interest to
protect. In those ignorant times, it was not understood, that the

tablished in England, lest the king should lose any part of his
customs upon wool by the exportation of woollen cloths, a like

profits of merchants are a subject not taxable directly; or that the
final payment of all such taxes must fall, with a considerable over-

duty was imposed upon them. The other two branches were, first,
a duty upon wine, which being imposed at so much a-ton, was

charge, upon the consumers.
The gains of alien merchants were looked upon more

called a tonnage; and, secondly, a duty upon all other goods, which
being imposed at so much a-pound of their supposed value, was

unfavourably than those of English merchants. It was natural, therefore, that those of the former should be taxed more heavily than

called a poundage. In the forty-seventh year of Edward III., a duty
of sixpence in the pound was imposed upon all goods exported

those of the latter. This distinction between the duties upon aliens
and those upon English merchants, which was begun from igno-

and imported, except wools, wool-felts, leather, and wines which
were subject to particular duties. In the fourteenth of Richard II.,

rance, has been continued front the spirit of monopoly, or in order to give our own merchants an advantage, both in the home

this duty was raised to one shilling in the pound; but, three years
afterwards, it was again reduced to sixpence. It was raised to

and in the foreign market.
With this distinction, the ancient duties of customs were im-

eightpence in the second year of Henry IV.; and, in the fourth of
the same prince, to one shilling. From this time to the ninth year

posed equally upon all sorts of goods, necessaries as well its luxuries, goods exported as well as goods imported. Why should the

of William III., this duty continued at one shilling in the pound.
The duties of tonnage and poundage were generally granted to

dealers in one sort of goods, it seems to have been thought, be
more favoured than those in another? or why should the mer-

the king by one and the same act of parliament, and were called
the subsidy of tonnage and poundage. The subsidy of poundage

chant exporter be more favoured than the merchant importer?
The ancient customs were divided into three branches. The first,

having continued for so long a time at one shilling in the pound,
or at five per cent., a subsidy came, in the language of the cus-

and, perhaps, the most ancient of all those duties, was that upon

toms, to denote a general duty of this kind of five per cent. This

723

The Wealth of Nations
subsidy, which is now called the old subsidy, still continues to be
levied, according to the book of rates established by the twelfth of

taken away altogether. In most cases, they have been taken away.
Bounties have even been given upon the exportation of some of

Charles II. The method of ascertaining, by a book of rates, the
value of goods subject to this duty, is said to be older than the time

them. Drawbacks, too, sometimes of the whole, and, in most cases,
of a part of the duties which are paid upon the importation of

of James I. The new subsidy, imposed by the ninth and tenth of
William III., was an additional five per cent. upon the greater part

foreign goods, have been granted upon their exportation. Only
half the duties imposed by the old subsidy upon importation, are

of goods. The one-third and the two-third subsidy made up between them another five per cent. of which they were proportion-

drawn back upon exportation; but the whole of those imposed by
the latter subsidies and other imposts are, upon the greater parts

able parts. The subsidy of 1747 made a fourth five per cent. upon
the greater part of goods; and that of 1759, a fifth upon some

of the goods, drawn back in the same manner. This growing favour
of exportation, and discouragement of importation, have suffered

particular sorts of goods. Besides those five subsidies, a great variety of other duties have occasionally been imposed upon particu-

only a few exceptions, which chiefly concern the materials of some
manufactures. These our merchants and manufacturers are willing

lar sorts of goods, in order sometimes to relieve the exigencie’s of
the state, and sometimes to regulate the trade of the country, ac-

should come as cheap as possible to themselves, and as dear as possible to their rivals and competitors in other countries. Foreign ma-

cording to the principles of the mercantile system.
That system has come gradually more and more into fashion.

terials are, upon this account, sometimes allowed to be imported
duty-free; spanish wool, for example, flax, and raw linen yarn. The

The old subsidy was imposed indifferently upon exportation, as
well as importation. The four subsequent subsidies, as well as the

exportation of the materials of home produce, and of those which
are the particular produce of our colonies, has sometimes been pro-

other duties which have since been occasionally imposed upon
particular sorts of goods, have, with a few exceptions, been laid

hibited, and sometimes subjected to higher duties. The exportation
of English wool has been prohibited. That of beaver skins, of beaver

altogether upon importation. The greater part of the ancient duties which had been imposed upon the exportation of the goods

wool, and of gum-senega, has been subjected to higher duties; Great
Britain, by the conquests of Canada and Senegal, having got almost

of home produce and manufacture, have either been lightened or

the monopoly of those commodities.

724

Adam Smith
That the mercantile system has not been very favourable to the
revenue of the great body of the people, to the annual produce of

duties, which never could have been imposed, had not the mercantile system taught us, in many cases, to employ taxation as an

the land and labour of the country, I have endeavoured to show in
the fourth book of this Inquiry. It seems not to have been more

instrument, not of revenue, but of monopoly.
The bounties which are sometimes given upon the exportation

favourable to the revenue of the sovereign; so far, at least, as that
revenue depends upon the duties of customs.

of home produce and manufactures, and the drawbacks which are
paid upon the re-exportation of the greater part of foreign goods,

In consequence of that system, the importation of several sorts
of goods has been prohibited altogether. This prohibition has, in

have given occasion to many frauds, and to a species of smuggling, more destructive of the public revenue than any other. In

some cases, entirely prevented, and in others has very much diminished, the importation of those commodities, by reducing the

order to obtain the bounty or drawback, the goods, it is well known,
are sometimes shipped, and sent to sea, but soon afterwards clan-

importers to the necessity of smuggling. It has entirely prevented
the importation of foreign wollens; and it has very much dimin-

destinely re-landed in some other part of the country. The defalcation of the revenue of customs occasioned by bounties and draw-

ished that of foreign silks and velvets, In both cases, it has entirely
annihilated the revenue of customs which might have been levied

backs, of which a great part are obtained fraudulently, is very great.
The gross produce of the customs, in the year which ended on the

upon such importation.
The high duties which have been imposed upon the importa-

5th of January 1755, amounted to £5,068,000. The bounties which
were paid out of this revenue, though in that year there was no

tion of many different sorts of foreign goods in order to discourage their consumption in Great Britain, have, in many cases, served

bounty upon corn, amounted to £167,806. The drawbacks which
were paid upon debentures and certificates, to £2,156,800. Boun-

only to encourage smuggling, and, in all cases, have reduced the
revenues of the customs below what more moderate duties would

ties and drawbacks together amounted to £2,324,600. In consequence of these deductions, the revenue of the customs amounted

have afforded. The saying of Dr. Swift, that in the arithmetic of
the customs, two and two, instead of making four, make some-

only to £2,743,400; from which deducting £287,900 for the expense of management, in salaries and other incidents, the neat

times only one, holds perfectly true with regard to such heavy

revenue of the customs for that year comes out to be £2,455,500.

725

The Wealth of Nations
The expense of management, amounts, in this manner, to between five and six per cent. upon the gross revenue of the cus-

of goods ought to be classed, and, consequently what duty they
ought to pay. Mistakes with regard to this sometimes ruin the

toms; and to something more than ten per cent. upon what remains of that revenue, after deducting what is paid away in boun-

custom-house officer, and frequently occasion much trouble, expense, and vexation to the importer. In point of perspicuity, preci-

ties and drawbacks.
Heavy duties being imposed upon almost all goods imported,

sion, and distinctness, therefore, the duties of customs are much
inferior to those of excise.

our merchant importers smuggle as much, and make entry of as
little as they can. Our merchant exporters, on the contrary, make

In order that the greater part of the members of any society
should contribute to the public revenue, in proportion to their

entry of more than they export; sometimes out of vanity, and to
pass for great dealers in goods which pay no duty gain a bounty

respective expense, it does not seem necessary that every single
article of that expense should be taxed. The revenue which is lev-

back. Our exports, in consequence of these different frauds, appear upon the custom-house books greatly to overbalance our

ied by the duties of excise is supposed to fall as equally upon the
contributors as that which is levied by the duties of customs; and

imports, to the unspeakable comfort of those politicians, who measure the national prosperity by what they call the balance of trade.

the duties of excise are imposed upon a few articles only of the
most general used and consumption. It has been the opinion of

All goods imported, unless particularly exempted, and such exemptions are not very numerous, are liable to some duties of cus-

many people, that, by proper management, the duties of customs
might likewise, without any loss to the public revenue, and with

toms. If any goods are imported, not mentioned in the book of
rates, they are taxed at 4s:9¾d. for every twenty shillings value,

great advantage to foreign trade, be confined to a few articles only.
The foreign articles, of the most general use and consumption

according to the oath of the importer, that is, nearly at five subsidies, or five poundage duties. The book of rates is extremely com-

in Great Britain, seem at present to consist chiefly in foreign wines
and brandies; in some of the productions of America and the West

prehensive, and enumerates a great variety of articles, many of
them little used, and, therefore, not well known. It is, upon this

Indies, sugar, rum, tobacco, cocoa-nuts, etc. and in some of those
of the East Indies, tea, coffee, china-ware, spiceries of all kinds,

account, frequently uncertain under what article a particular sort

several sorts of piece-goods, etc. These different articles afford, the

726

Adam Smith
greater part of the perhaps, at present, revenue which is drawn
from the duties of customs. The taxes which at present subsist

creasing the difficulty of smuggling. The temptation to smuggle
can be diminished only by the lowering of the tax; and the diffi-

upon foreign manufactures, if you except those upon the few contained in the foregoing enumeration, have, the greater part of them,

culty of smuggling can be increased only by establishing that system of administration which is most proper for preventing it.

been imposed for the purpose, not of revenue, but of monopoly,
or to give our own merchants an advantage in the home market.

The excise laws, it appears, I believe, from experience, obstruct
and embarrass the operations of the smuggler much more effectu-

By removing all prohibitions, and by subjecting all foreign manufactures to such moderate taxes, as it was found from experience,

ally than those of the customs. By introducing into the customs a
system of administration as similar to that of the excise as the

afforded upon each article the greatest revenue to the public, our
own workmen might still have a considerable advantage in the

nature of the different duties will admit, the difficulty of smuggling might be very much increased. This alteration, it has been

home market; and many articles, some of which at present afford
no revenue to government, and others a very inconsiderable one,

supposed by many people, might very easily be brought about.
The importer of commodities liable to any duties of customs, it

might afford a very great one.
High taxes, sometimes by diminishing the consumption of the

has been said, might, at his option, be allowed either to carry
them to his own private warehouse; or to lodge them in a ware-

taxed commodities, and sometimes by encouraging smuggling frequently afford a smaller revenue to government than what might

house, provided either at his own expense or at that of the public,
but under the key of the custom-house officer, and never to be

be drawn from more moderate taxes.
When the diminution of revenue is the effect of the diminution

opened but in his presence. If the merchant carried them to his
own private warehouse, the duties to be immediately paid, and

of consumption, there can be but one remedy, and that is the
lowering of the tax.

never afterwards to be drawn back; and that warehouse to be at all
times subject to the visit and examination of the custom-house

When the diminution of revenue is the effect of the encouragement given to smuggling, it may, perhaps, be remedied in two

officer, in order to ascertain how far the quantity contained in it
corresponded with that for which the duty had been paid. If he

ways; either by diminishing the temptation to smuggle, or by in-

carried them to the public warehouse, no duty to be paid till they

727

The Wealth of Nations
were taken out for home consumption. If taken out for exportation, to be duty-free; proper security being always given that they

nopoly; it seems not improbable that a revenue, at least equal to
the present neat revenue of the customs, might be drawn from

should be so exported. The dealers in those particular commodities, either by wholesale or retail, to be at all times subject to the

duties upon the importation of only a few sorts of goods of the
most general use and consumption; and that the duties of cus-

visit and examination of the custom-house officer; and to be obliged
to justify, by proper certificates, the payment of the duty upon the

toms might thus be brought to the same degree of simplicity, certainty, and precision, as those of excise. What the revenue at present

whole quantity contained in their shops or warehouses. What are
called the excise duties upon rum imported, are at present levied

loses by drawbacks upon the re-exportation of foreign goods, which
are afterwards re-landed and consumed at home, would, under

in this manner; and the same system of administration might,
perhaps, be extended to all duties upon goods imported; provided

this system, be saved altogether. If to this saving, which would
alone be very considerable, were added the abolition of all boun-

always that those duties were, like the duties of excise, confined to
a few sorts of goods of the most general use and consumption. If

ties upon the exportation of home produce; in all cases in which
those bounties were not in reality drawbacks of some duties of

they were extended to almost all sorts of goods, as at present, public warehouses of sufficient extent could not easily be provided;

excise which had before been advanced; it cannot well be doubted,
but that the neat revenue of customs might, after an alteration of

and goods of a very delicate nature, or of which the preservation
required much care and attention, could not safely be trusted by

this kind, be fully equal to what it had ever been before.
If, by such a change of system, the public revenue suffered no

the merchant in any warehouse but his own.
If, by such a system of administration, smuggling to any con-

loss, the trade and manufactures of the country would certainly
gain a very considerable advantage. The trade in the commodities

siderable extent could be prevented, even under pretty high duties; and if every duty was occasionally either heightened or low-

not taxed, by far the greatest number would be perfectly free, and
might be carried on to and from all parts of the world with every

ered according as it was most likely, either the one way or the
other, to afford the greatest revenue to the state; taxation being

possible advantage. Among those commodities would be comprehended all the necessaries of life, and all the materials of manufac-

always employed as an instrument of revenue, and never of mo-

ture. So far as the free importation of the necessaries of life re-

728

Adam Smith
duced their average money price in the home market, it would
reduce the money price of labour, but without reducing in any

for home consumption, the importer not being obliged to advance
the tax till he had an opportunity of selling his goods, either to some

respect its real recompence. The value of money is in proportion
to the quantity of the necessaries of life which it will purchase.

dealer, or to some consumer, he could always afford to sell them
cheaper than if he had been obliged to advance it at the moment of

That of the necessaries of life is altogether independent of the
quantity of money which can be had for them. The reduction in

importation. Under the same taxes, the foreign trade of consumption, even in the taxed commodities, might in this manner be car-

the money price of labour would necessarily be attended with a
proportionable one in that of all home manufactures, which would

ried on with much more advantage than it is at present.
It was the object of the famous excise scheme of Sir Robert

thereby gain some advantage in all foreign markets. The price of
some manufactures would be reduced, in a still greater propor-

Walpole, to establish, with regard to wine and tobacco, a system
not very unlike that which is here proposed. But though the bill

tion, by the free importation of the raw materials. If raw silk could
be imported from China and Indostan, duty-free, the silk manu-

which was then brought into Parliament, comprehended those
two commodities only, it was generally supposed to be meant as

facturers in England could greatly undersell those of both France
and Italy. There would be no occasion to prohibit the importation

an introduction to a more extensive scheme of the same kind.
Faction, combined with the interest of smuggling merchants, raised

of foreign silks and velvets. The cheapness of their goods would
secure to our own workmen, not only the possession of a home, but

so violent, though so unjust a clamour, against that bill, that the
minister thought proper to drop it; and, from a dread of exciting

a very great command of the foreign market. Even the trade in the
commodities taxed, would be carried on with much more advan-

a clamour of the same kind, none of his successors have dared to
resume the project.

tage than at present. If those commodities were delivered out of the
public warehouse for foreign exportation, being in this case exempted

The duties upon foreign luxuries, imported for home consumption, though they sometimes fall upon the poor, fall principally

from all taxes, the trade in them would be perfectly free. The carrying trade, in all sorts of goods, would, under this system, enjoy

upon people of middling or more than middling fortune. Such
are, for example, the duties upon foreign wines, upon coffee, choco-

every possible advantage. If these commodities were delivered out

late, tea, sugar, etc.

729

The Wealth of Nations
The duties upon the cheaper luxuries of home produce, destined for home consumption, fall pretty equally upon people of

belongs to the same rank; a considerable part to those who are
somewhat below the middling rank, and a small part even to the

all ranks, in proportion to their respective expense. The poor pay
the duties upon malt, hops, beer, and ale, upon their own con-

lowest rank; common labourers sometimes possessing in property
an acre or two of land. Though the expense of those inferior ranks

sumption; the rich, upon both their own consumption and that
of their servants.

of people, therefore, taking them individually, is very small, yet
the whole mass of it, taking them collectively, amounts always to

The whole consumption of the inferior ranks of people, or of
those below the middling rank, it must be observed, is, in every

by much the largest portion of the whole expense of the society;
what remains of the annual produce of the land and labour of the

country, much greater, not only in quantity, but in value, than
that of the middling, and of those above the middling rank. The

country, for the consumption of the superior ranks, being always
much less, not only in quantity, but in value. The taxes upon ex-

whole expense of the inferior is much greater titan that of the
superior ranks. In the first place, almost the whole capital of every

pense, therefore, which fall chiefly upon that of the superior ranks
of people, upon the smaller portion of the annual produce, are

country is annually distributed among the inferior ranks of people,
as the wages of productive labour. Secondly, a great part of the

likely to be much less productive than either those which fall indifferently upon the expense of all ranks, or even those which fall

revenue, arising from both the rent of land and the profits of stock,
is annually distributed among the same rank, in the wages and

chiefly upon that of the inferior ranks, than either those which fall
indifferently upon the whole annual produce, or those which fall

maintenance of menial servants, and other unproductive labourers.
Thirdly, some part of the profits of stock belongs to the same

chiefly upon the larger portion of it. The excise upon the materials and manufacture of home-made fermented and spirituous li-

rank, as a revenue arising from the employment of their small
capitals. The amount of the profits annually made by small shop-

quors, is, accordingly, of all the different taxes upon expense, by
far the most productive; and this branch of the excise falls very

keepers, tradesmen, and retailers of all kinds, is everywhere very
considerable, and makes a very considerable portion of the annual

much, perhaps principally, upon the expense of the common
people. In the year which ended on the 5th of July 1775, the gross

produce. Fourthly and lastly, some part even of the rent of land

produce of this branch of the excise amounted to £3,341,837:9:9.

730

Adam Smith
It must always be remembered, however, that it is the luxuries,
and not the necessary expense of the inferior ranks of people, that

times. But in the country, many middling and almost all rich and
great families, brew their own beer. Their strong beer, therefore,

ought ever to be taxed. The final payment of any tax upon their
necessary expense, would fall altogether upon the superior ranks

costs them eight shillings a-barrel less than it costs the common
brewer, who must have his profit upon the tax, as well as upon all

of people; upon the smaller portion of the annual produce, and
not upon the greater. Such a tax must, in all cases, either raise the

the other expense which he advances. Such families, therefore,
must drink their beer at least nine or ten shillings a-barrel cheaper

wages of labour, or lessen the demand for it. It could not raise the
wages of labour, without throwing the final payment of the tax

than any liquor of the same quality can be drank by the common
people, to whom it is everywhere more convenient to buy their

upon the superior ranks of people. It could not lessen the demand
for labour, without lessening the annual produce of the land and

beer, by little and little, from the brewery or the ale-house. Malt,
in the same manner, that is made for the use of a private family, is

labour of the country, the fund upon which all taxes must be finally paid. Whatever might be the state to which a tax of this kind

not liable to the visit or examination of the tax-gatherer but, in
this case the family must compound at seven shillings and sixpence

reduced the demand for labour, it must always raise wages higher
than they otherwise would be in that state; and the final payment

a-head for the tax. Seven shillings and sixpence are equal to the
excise upon ten bushels of malt; a quantity fully equal to what all

of this enhancement of wages must, in all cases, fall upon the
superior ranks of people.

the different members of any sober family, men, women, and children, are, at an average, likely to consume. But in rich and great

Fermented liquors brewed, and spiritous liquors distilled, not
for sale, but for private use, are not in Great Britain liable to any

families, where country hospitality is much practised, the malt liquors consumed by the members of the family make but a small

duties of excise. This exemption, of which the object is to save
private families from the odious visit and examination of the tax-

part of the consmnption of the house. Either on account of this
composition, however, or for other reasons, it is not near so com-

gatherer, occasions the burden of those duties to fall frequently
much lighter upon the rich than upon the poor. It is not, indeed,

mon to malt as to brew for private use. It is difficult to imagine any
equitable reason, why those who either brew or distil for private use

very common to distil for private use, though it is done some-

should not be subject to a composition of the same kind.

731

The Wealth of Nations
A greater revenue than what is at present drawn from all the
heavy taxes upon malt, beer, and ale, might be raised, it has fre-

upon malt, beer, and ale, cannot be estimated at less than twentyfour or twenty-five shillings upon the produce of a quarter of malt.

quently been said, by a much lighter tax upon malt; the opportunities of defrauding the revenue being much greater in a brewery

But by taking off all the different duties upon beer and ale, and by
trebling the malt tax, or by raising it from six to eighteen shilling’s

than in a malt-house; and those who brew for private use being
exempted from all duties or composition for duties, which is not

upon the quarter of malt, a greater revenue, it is said, might be
raised by this single tax, than what is at present drawn from all

the case with those who malt for private use.
In the porter brewery of London, a quarter of malt is com-

those heavier taxes.

monly brewed into more than two barrels and a-half, sometimes
into three barrels of porter. The different taxes upon malt amount

In 1772, the old malt tax produced......... £722,023: 11: 11
The additional.............. £356,776: 7: 9¾

to six shillings a-quarter; those upon strong ale and beer to eight
shillings a-barrel. In the porter brewery, therefore, the different

In 1775, the old tax produced.................. £561,627: 3: 7½
The additional.............. £278,650: 15: 3¾

taxes upon malt, beer, and ale, amount to between twenty-six and
thirty shillings upon the produce of a quarter of malt. In the country

In 1774, the old tax produced ............... £624,614: 17: 5¾
The additional...............£310,745: 2: 8½

brewery for common country sale, a quarter of malt is seldom
brewed into less than two barrels of strong, and one barrel of small

In 1775, the old tax produced ................£657,357: 0: 8¼
The additional...............£323,785: 12: 6¼

beer; frequently into two barrels and a-half of strong beer. The
different taxes upon small beer amount to one shilling and

£5,855,580: 12: 0¾
Average of these four years ..................... £958,895: 3: 0

fourpence a-barrel. In the country brewery, therefore, the different taxes upon malt, beer, and ale, seldom amount to less than

In 1772, the country excise produced........£1,243,120: 5: 3

twenty-three shillings and fourpence, frequently to twenty-six shillings, upon the produce of a quarter of malt. Taking the whole

The London brewery
408,260: 7: 2¾
In 1773, the country excise........................£1,245,808: 3: 3

kingdom at an average, therefore, the whole amount of the duties

The London brewery

732

405,406:

17: 10½

Adam Smith
In 1774, the country excise................£1,246,373: 14: 5½
The London brewery
320,601: 18: 0¼

that liquor. But to balance whatever may be the ordinary amount
of those two taxes, there is comprehended under what is called the

In 1775, the country excise................£1,214,583: 6: 1¼
The London brewery
463,670: 7: 0¼

country excise, first, the old excise of six shillings and eightpence
upon the hogshead of cyder; secondly, a like tax of six shillings

4)
£6,547,832: 19: 2¼
Average of these four years ...............£1,636,958: 4: 9½

and eightpence upon the hogshead of verjuice; thirdly, another of
eight shillings and ninepence upon the hogshead of vinegar; and,

To which adding the average malt tax.. 958,895: 3: 0¼

lastly, a fourth tax of elevenpence upon the gallon of mead or
metheglin. The produce of those different taxes will probably much

The whole amount of those different taxes comes out to
be......................................................£2,595,835: 7: 10

more than counterbalance that of the duties imposed, by what is
called the annual malt tax, upon cyder and mum.

But, by trebling the malt tax, or by raising it from six to eighteen

Malt is consumed, not only in the brewery of beer and ale, but
in the manufacture of low wines and spirits. If the malt tax were to

shillings upon the quarter of malt, that single tax would produce...................................................£2,876,685: 9: 0

be raised to eighteen shillings upon the quarter, it might be necessary to make some abatement in the different excises which are

A sum which exceeds the foregoing by.... 280,832: 1: 3

imposed upon those particular sorts of low wines and spirits, of
which malt makes any part of the materials. In what are called

Under the old malt tax, indeed, is comprehended a tax of four
shillings upon the hogshead of cyder, and another of ten shillings

malt spirits, it makes commonly but a third part of the materials;
the other two-thirds being either raw barley, or one-third barley

upon the barrel of mum. In 1774, the tax upon cyder produced
only £3,083:6:8. It probably fell somewhat short of its usual

and one-third wheat. In the distillery of malt spirits, both the opportunity and the temptation to smuggle are much greater than

amount; all the different taxes upon cyder, having, that year, produced less than ordinary. The tax upon mum, though much heavier,

either in a brewery or in a malt-house; the opportunity, on account of the smaller bulk and greater value of the commodity, and

is still less productive, on account of the smaller consumption of

the temptation, on account of the superior height of the duties,

733

The Wealth of Nations
which amounted to 3s. 10 2/3d. upon the gallon of spirits. {Though
the duties directly imposed upon proof spirits amount only to 2s.

system of excise duties, seem to be without foundation. Those
objections are, that the tax, instead of dividing itself, as at present,

6d per gallon, these, added to the duties upon the low wines, from
which they are distilled, amount to 3s 10 2/3d. Both low wines

pretty equally upon the profit of the maltster, upon that of the
brewer and upon that of the retailer, would so far as it affected

and proof spirits are, to prevent frauds, now rated according to
what they gauge in the wash.}

profit, fall altogether upon that of the maltster; that the maltster
could not so easily get back the amount of the tax in the advanced

By increasing the duties upon malt, and reducing those upon
the distillery, both the opportunities and the temptation to smuggle

price of his malt, as the brewer and retailer in the advanced price
of their liquor; and that so heavy a tax upon malt might reduce

would be diminished, which might occasion a still further augmentation of revenue.

the rent and profit of barley land.
No tax can ever reduce, for any considerable time, the rate of

It has for some time past been the policy of Great Britain to
discourage the consumption of spiritous liquors, on account of

profit in any particular trade, which must always keep its level
with other trades in the neighbourhood. The present duties upon

their supposed tendency to ruin the health and to corrupt the
morals of the common people. According to this policy, the abate-

malt, beer, and ale, do not affect the profits of the dealers in those
commodities, who all get back the tax with an additional profit,

ment of the taxes upon the distillery ought not to be so great as to
reduce, in any respect, the price of those liquors. Spiritous liquors

in the enhanced price of their goods. A tax, indeed, may render
the goods upon which it is imposed so dear, as to diminish the

might remain as dear as ever; while, at the same time, the wholesome and invigorating liquors of beer and ale might be consider-

consumption of them. But the consumption of malt is in malt
liquors; and a tax of eighteen shillings upon the quarter of malt

ably reduced in their price. The people might thus be in part relieved from one of the burdens of which they at present complain

could not well render those liquors dearer than the different taxes,
amounting to twenty-four or twenty-five shillings, do at present.

the most; while, at the same time, the revenue might be considerably augmented.

Those liquors, on the contrary, would probably become cheaper,
and the consumption of them would be more likely to increase

The objections of Dr. Davenant to this alteration in the present

than to diminish.

734

Adam Smith
It is not very easy to understand why it should be more difficult
for the maltster to get back eighteen shillings in the advanced price

lings, would be more likely to increase than diminish that demand. The rent and profit of barley land, besides, must always be

of his malt, than it is at present for the brewer to get back twentyfour or twenty-five, sometimes thirty shillings, in that of his li-

nearly equal to those of other equally fertile and equally well cultivated land. If they were less, some part of the barley land would

quor. The maltster, indeed, instead of a tax of six shillings, would
be obliged to advance one of eighteen shilling upon every quarter

soon be turned to some other purpose; and if they were greater,
more land would soon be turned to the raising of barley. When

of malt. But the brewer is at present obliged to advance a tax of
twenty-four or twentyfive, sometimes thirty shillings, upon every

the ordinary price of any particular produce of land is at what
may be called a monopoly price, a tax upon it necessarily reduces

quarter of malt which he brews. It could not be more inconvenient for the maltster to advance a lighter tax, than it is at present

the rent and profit of the land which grows it. A tax upon the
produce of those precious vineyards, of which the wine falls so

for the brewer to advance a heavier one. The maltster does not
always keep in his granaries a stock of malt, which it will require a

much short of the effectual demand, that its price is always above
the natural proportion to that of the produce of other equally

longer time to dispose of than the stock of beer and ale which the
brewer frequently keeps in his cellars. The former, therefore, may

fertile and equally well cultivated land, would necessarily reduce
the rent and profit of those vineyards. The price of the wines be-

frequently get the returns of his money as soon as the latter. But
whatever inconveniency might arise to the maltster from being

ing already the highest that could be got for the quantity commonly sent to market, it could not be raised higher without di-

obliged to advance a heavier tax, it could easily be remedied, by
granting him a few months longer credit than is at present com-

minishing that quantity; and the quantity could not be diminished without still greater loss, because the lands could not be

monly given to the brewer.
Nothing could reduce the rent and profit of barley land, which

turned to any other equally valuable produce. The whole weight
of the tax, therefore, would fall upon the rent and profit; properly

did not reduce the demand for barley. But a change of system,
which reduced the duties upon a quarter of malt brewed into beer

upon the rent of the vineyard. When it has been proposed to lay
any new tax upon sugar, our sugar planters have frequently com-

and ale, from twentyfour and twenty-five shillings to eighteen shil-

plained that the whole weight of such taxes fell not upon the con-

735

The Wealth of Nations
sumer, but upon the producer; they never having been able to
raise the price of their sugar after the tax higher than it was before.

artificer, is surely most unjust and unequal, and ought to be taken
away, even though this change was never to take place. It has prob-

The price had, it seems, before the tax, been a monopoly price;
and the arguments adduced to show that sugar was an improper

ably been the interest of this superior order of people, however,
which has hitherto prevented a change of system that could not

subject of taxation, demonstrated perhaps that it was a proper
one; the gains of monopolists, whenever they can be come at,

well fail both to increase the revenue and to relieve the people.
Besides such duties as those of custom and excise above men-

being certainly of all subjects the most proper. But the ordinary
price of barley has never been a monopoly price; and the rent and

tioned, there are several others which affect the price of goods
more unequally and more indirectly. Of this kind are the duties,

profit of barley land have never been above their natural proportion to those of other equally fertile and equally well cultivated

which, in French, are called peages, which in old Saxon times were
called the duties of passage, and which seem to have been origi-

land. The different taxes which have been imposed upon malt,
beer, and ale, have never lowered the price of barley; have never

nally established for the same purpose as our turnpike tolls, or the
tolls upon our canals and navigable rivers, for the maintenance of

reduced the rent and profit of barley land. The price of malt to the
brewer has constantly risen in proportion to the taxes imposed

the road or of the navigation. Those duties, when applied to such
purposes, are most properly imposed according to the bulk or

upon it; and those taxes, together with the different duties upon
beer and ale, have constantly either raised the price, or, what comes

weight of the goods. As they were originally local and provincial
duties, applicable to local and provincial purposes, the adminis-

to the same thing, reduced the quality of those commodities to
the consumer. The final payment of those taxes has fallen con-

tration of them was, in most cases, entrusted to the particular
town, parish, or lordship, in which they were levied; such com-

stantly upon the consumer, and not upon the producer.
The only people likely to suffer by the change of system here

munities being, in some way or other, supposed to be accountable
for the application. The sovereign, who is altogether unaccount-

proposed, are those who brew for their own private use. But the
exemption, which this superior rank of people at present enjoy,

able, has in many countries assumed to himself the administration of those duties; and though he has in most cases enhanced

from very heavy taxes which are paid by the poor labourer and

very much the duty, he has in many entirely neglected the applica-

736

Adam Smith
tion. If the turnpike tolls of Great Britain should ever become one
of the resources of government, we may learn, by the example of

Such taxes upon luxuries, as the greater part of the duties of
customs and excise, though they all fall indifferently upon every

many other nations, what would probably be the consequence.
Such tolls, no doubt, are finally paid by the consumer; but the

different species of revenue, and are paid finally, or without any
retribution, by whoever consumes the commodities upon which

consumer is not taxed in proportion to his expense, when he pays,
not according to the value, but according to the bulk or weight of

they are imposed; yet they do not always fall equally or proportionally upon the revenue of every individual. As every man’s

what he consumes. When such duties are imposed, not according
to the bulk or weight, but according to the supposed value of the

humour regulates the degree of his consumption, every man contributes rather according to his humour, than proportion to his

goods, they become properly a sort of inland customs or excise,
which obstruct very much the most important of all branches of

revenue: the profuse contribute more, the parsimonious less, than
their proper proportion. During the minority of a man of great

commerce, the interior commerce of the country.
In some small states, duties similar to those passage duties are

fortune, he contributes commonly very little, by his consumption, towards the support of that state from whose protection he

imposed upon goods carried across the territory, either by land or
by water, from one foreign country to another. These are in some

derives a great revenue. Those who live in another country, contribute nothing by their consumption towards the support of the

countries called transit-duties. Some of the little Italian states which
are situated upon the Po, and the rivers which run into it, derive

government of that country, in which is situated the source of
their revenue. If in this latter country there should be no land tax,

some revenue from duties of this kind, which are paid altogether
by foreigners, and which, perhaps, are the only duties that one

nor any considerable duty upon the transference either of moveable or immoveable property, as is the case in Ireland, such absen-

state can impose upon the subjects of another, without obstruction in any respect, the industry or commerce of its own. The

tees may derive a great revenue from the protection of a government, to the support of which they do not contribute a single

most important transit-duty in the world, is that levied by the
king of Denmark upon all merchant ships which pass through the

shilling. This inequality is likely to be greatest in a country of
which the government is, in some respects, subordinate and de-

Sound.

pendant upon that of some other. The people who possess the

737

The Wealth of Nations
most extensive property in the dependant, will, in this case, generally chuse to live in the governing country. Ireland is precisely in

either in the duties of customs in Great Britain, or in other duties
of the same kind in other countries, it cannot arise from the na-

this situation; and we cannot therefore wonder, that the proposal
of a tax upon absentees should be so very popular in that country.

ture of those duties, but from the inaccurate or unskilful manner
in which the law that imposes them is expressed.

It might, perhaps, be a little difficult to ascertain either what sort,
or what degree of absence, would subject a man to be taxed as an

Taxes upon luxuries generally are, and always may be, paid piecemeal, or in proportion as the contributors have occasion to pur-

absentee, or at what precise time the tax should either begin or
end. If you except, however, this very peculiar situation, any in-

chase the goods upon which they are imposed. In the time and
mode of payment, they are, or may be, of all taxes the most conve-

equality in the contribution of individuals which can arise from
such taxes, is much more than compensated by the very circum-

nient. Upon the whole, such taxes, therefore, are perhaps as agreeable to the three first of the four general maxims concerning taxa-

stance which occasions that inequality; the circumstance that every man’s contribution is altogether voluntary; it being altogether

tion, as any other. They offend in every respect against the fourth.
Such taxes, in proportion to what they bring into the public

in his power, either to consume, or not to consume, the commodity taxed. Where such taxes, therefore, are properly assessed, and

treasury of the state, always take out, or keep out, of the pockets
of the people, more than almost any other taxes. They seem to do

upon proper commodities, they are paid with less grumbling than
any other. When they are advanced by the merchant or manufac-

this in all the four different ways in which it is possible to do it.
First, the levying of such taxes, even when imposed in the most

turer, the consumer, who finally pays them, soon comes to confound them with the price of the commodities, and almost forgets

judicious manner, requires a great number of custom-house and
excise officers, whose salaries and perquisites are a real tax upon

that he pays any tax.
Such taxes are, or may be, perfectly certain; or may be assessed,

the people, which brings nothing into the treasury of the state.
This expense, however, it must be acknowledged, is more moder-

so as to leave no doubt concerning either what ought to be paid,
or when it ought to be paid; concerning either the quantity or the

ate in Great Britain than in most other countries. In the year which
ended on the 5th of July, 1775, the gross produce of the different

time of payment. What ever uncertainty there may sometimes be,

duties, under the management of the commissioners of excise in

738

Adam Smith
England, amounted to £5,507,308:18:8¼, which was levied at an
expense of little more than five and a-half per cent. From this

malt liquors, a saving, it is supposed, of more than £50,000, might
be made in the annual expense of the excise. By confining the duties

gross produce, however, there must be deducted what was paid
away in bounties and drawbacks upon the exportation of exciseable

of customs to a few sorts of goods, and by levying those duties
according to the excise laws, a much greater saving might probably

goods, which will reduce the neat produce below five millions.
{The neat produce of that year, after deducting all expenses and

be made in the annual expense of the customs.
Secondly, such taxes necessarily occasion some obstruction or

allowances, amounted to £4,975,652:19:6.} The levying of the
salt duty, and excise duty, but under a different management, is

discouragement to certain branches of industry. As they always
raise the price of the commodity taxed, they so far discourage its

much more expensive. The neat revenue of the customs does not
amount to two millions and a-half, which is levied at an expense

consumption, and consequently its production. If it is a commodity of home growth or manufacture, less labour comes to be

of more than ten per cent., in the salaries of officers and other
incidents. But the perquisites of custom-house officers are every-

employed in raising and producing it. If it is a foreign commodity
of which the tax increases in this manner the price, the commodi-

where much greater than their salaries; at some ports more than
double or triple those salaries. If the salaries of officers, and other

ties of the same kind which are made at home may thereby, indeed, gain some advantage in the home market, and a greater quan-

incidents, therefore, amount to more than ten per cent. upon the
neat revenue of the customs, the whole expense of levying that

tity of domestic industry may thereby be turned toward preparing
them. But though this rise of price in a foreign commodity, may

revenue may amount, in salaries and perquisites together, to more
than twenty or thirty per cent. The officers of excise receive few or

encourage domestic industry in one particular branch, it necessarily discourages that industry in almost every other. The dearer

no perquisites; and the administration of that branch of the revenue
being of more recent establishment, is in general less corrupted than

the Birmingham manufacturer buys his foreign wine, the cheaper
he necessarily sells that part of his hardware with which, or, what

that of the customs, into which length of time has introduced and
authorised many abuses. By charging upon malt the whole revenue

comes to the same thing, with the price of which, he buys it. That
part of his hardware, therefore, becomes of less value to him, and

which is at present levied by the different duties upon malt and

he has less encouragement to work at it. The dearer the consumers

739

The Wealth of Nations
in one country pay for the surplus produce of another, the cheaper
they necessarily sell that part of their own surplus produce with

lic revenue, the laws which guard it are little respected. Not many
people are scrupulous about smuggling, when, without perjury,

which, or, what comes to the same thing, with the price of which,
they buy it. That part of their own surplus produce becomes of

they can find an easy and safe opportunity of doing so. To pretend
to have any scruple about buying smuggled goods, though a mani-

less value to them, and they have less encouragement to increase
its quantity. All taxes upon consumable commodities, therefore,

fest encouragement to the violation of the revenue laws, and to
the perjury which almost always attends it, would, in most coun-

tend to reduce the quantity of productive labour below what it
otherwise would be, either in preparing the commodities taxed, if

tries, be regarded as one of those pedantic pieces of hypocrisy which,
instead of gaining credit with anybody, serve only to expose the

they are home commodities, or in preparing those with which
they are purchased, if they are foreign commodities. Such taxes,

person who affects to practise them to the suspicion of being a
greater knave than most of his neighbours. By this indulgence of

too, always alter, more or less, the natural direction of national
industry, and turn it into a channel always different from, and

the public, the smuggler is often encouraged to continue a trade,
which he is thus taught to consider as in some measure innocent;

generally less advantageous, than that in which it would have run
of its own accord.

and when the severity of the revenue laws is ready to fall upon
him, he is frequently disposed to defend with violence, what he

Thirdly, the hope of evading such taxes by smuggling, gives frequent occasion to forfeitures and other penalties, which entirely

has been accustomed to regard as his just property. From being at
first, perhaps, rather imprudent than criminal, he at last too often

ruin the smuggler; a person who, though no doubt highly blameable for violating the laws of his country, is frequently incapable

becomes one of the hardiest and most determined violators of the
laws of society. By the ruin of the smuggler, his capital, which had

of violating those of natural justice, and would have been, in every
respect, an excellent citizen, had not the laws of his country made

before been employed in maintaining productive labour, is absorbed either in the revenue of the state, or in that of the revenue

that a crime which nature never meant to be so. In those corrupted governments, where there is at least a general suspicion of

officer; and is employed in maintaining unproductive, to the diminution of the general capital of the society, and of the useful in-

much unnecessary expense, and great misapplication of the pub-

dustry which it might otherwise have maintained.

740

Adam Smith
Fourthly, such taxes, by subjecting at least the dealers in the
taxed commodities, to the frequent visits and odious examination

lent dealers, whose smuggling is either prevented or detected by
their diligence.

of the tax-gatherers, expose them sometimes, no doubt, to some
degree of oppression, and always to much trouble and vexation;

The inconveniencies, however, which are, perhaps, in some degree inseparable from taxes upon consumable communities, fall

and though vexation, as has already been said, is not strictly speaking expense, it is certainly equivalent to the expense at which ev-

as light upon the people of Great Britain as upon those of any
other country of which the government is nearly as expensive.

ery man would be willing to redeem himself from it. The laws of
excise, though more effectual for the purpose for which they were

Our state is not perfect, and might be mended; but it is as good,
or better, than that of most of our neighbours.

instituted, are, in this respect, more vexatious than those of the
customs. When a merchant has imported goods subject to certain

In consequence of the notion, that duties upon consumable
goods were taxes upon the profits of merchants, those duties have,

duties of customs; when he has paid those duties, and lodged the
goods in his warehouse; he is not, in most cases, liable to any

in some countries, been repeated upon every successive sale of the
goods. If the profits of the merchant-importer or merchant-manu-

further trouble or vexation from the custom-house officer. It is
otherwise with goods subject to duties of excise. The dealers have

facturer were taxed, equality seemed to require that those of all the
middle buyers, who intervened between either of them and the

no respite from the continual visits and examination of the excise
officers. The duties of excise are, upon this account, more un-

consumer, should likewise be taxed. The famous alcavala of Spain
seems to have been established upon this principle. It was at first a

popular than those of the customs; and so are the officers who
levy them. Those officers, it is pretended, though in general, per-

tax of ten per cent. afterwards of fourteen per cent. and it is at
present only six per cent. upon the sale of every sort of property

haps, they do their duty fully as well as those of the customs; yet,
as that duty obliges them to be frequently very troublesome to

whether moveable or immoveable; and it is repeated every time
the property is sold. {Memoires concernant les Droits, etc. tom. i,

some of their neighbours, commonly contract a certain hardness
of character, which the others frequently have not. This observa-

p. 15} The levying of this tax requires a multitude of revenue officers, sufficient to guard the transportation of goods, not only

tion, however, may very probably be the mere suggestion of fraudu-

from one province to another, but from one shop to another. It

741

The Wealth of Nations
subjects, not only the dealers in some sorts of goods, but those in
all sorts, every farmer, every manufacturer, every merchant and

The inland trade is almost perfectly free; and the greater part of
goods may be carried from one end of the kingdom to the other,

shopkeeper, to the continual visit and examination of the tax-gatherers. Through the greater part of the country in which a tax of

without requiring any permit or let-pass, without being subject to
question, visit or examination, from the revenue officers. There

this kind is established, nothing can be produced for distant sale.
The produce of every part of the country must be proportioned to

are a few exceptions, but they are such as can give no interruption
to any important branch of inland commerce of the country. Goods

the consumption of the neighbourhood. It is to the alcavala, accordingly, that Ustaritz imputes the ruin of the manufactures of

carried coastwise, indeed, require certificates or coast-cockets. If
you except coals, however, the rest are almost all duty-free. This

Spain. He might have imputed to it, likewise, the declension of
agriculture, it being imposed not only upon manufactures, but

freedom of interior commerce, the effect of the uniformity of the
system of taxation, is perhaps one of the principal causes of the

upon the rude produce of the land.
In the kingdom of Naples, there is a similar tax of three per

prosperity of Great Britain; every great country being necessarily
the best and most extensive market for the greater part of the pro-

cent. upon the value of all contracts, and consequently upon that
of all contracts of sale. It is both lighter than the Spanish tax, and

ductions of its own industry. If the same freedom in consequence
of the same uniformity, could be extended to Ireland and the plan-

the greater part of towns and parishes are allowed to pay a composition in lieu of it. They levy this composition in what manner

tations, both the grandeur of the state, and the prosperity of every
part of the empire, would probably be still greater than at present.

they please, generally in a way that gives no interruption to the
interior commerce of the place. The Neapolitan tax, therefore, is

In France, the different revenue laws which take place in the
different provinces, require a multitude of revenue officers to sur-

not near so ruinous as the Spanish one.
The uniform system of taxation, which, with a few exception of

round, not only the frontiers of the kingdom, but those of almost
each particular province, in order either to prevent the importa-

no great consequence, takes place in all the different parts of the
united kingdom of Great Britain, leaves the interior commerce of

tion of certain goods, or to subject it to the payment of certain
duties, to the no small interruption of the interior commerce of

the country, the inland and coasting trade, almost entirely free.

the country. Some provinces are allowed to compound for the

742

Adam Smith
gabelle, or salt tax; others are exempted from it altogether. Some
provinces are exempted from the exclusive sale of tobacco, which

five great branches, each of which was originally the subject of a
particular farm, though they are now all united into one), and in

the farmers-general enjoy through the greater part of the kingdom. The aides, which correspond to the excise in England, are

those which are said to be reckoned foreign, there are many local
duties which do not extend beyond a particular town or district.

very different in different provinces. Some provinces are exempted
from them, and pay a composition or equivalent. In those in which

There are some such even in the provinces which are said to be
treated as foreign, particularly in the city of Marseilles. It is un-

they take place, and are in farm, there are many local duties which
do not extend beyond a particular town or district. The traites,

necessary to observe how much both the restraints upon the interior commerce of the country, and the number of the revenue

which correspond to our customs, divide the kingdom into three
great parts; first, the provinces subject to the tariff of 1664, which

officers, must be multiplied, in order to guard the frontiers of
those different provinces and districts which are subject to such

are called the provinces of the five great farms, and under which
are comprehended Picardy, Normandy, and the greater part of the

different systems of taxation.
Over and above the general restraints arising from this compli-

interior provinces of the kingdom; secondly, the provinces subject
to the tariff of 1667, which are called the provinces reckoned for-

cated system of revenue laws, the commerce of wine (after corn,
perhaps, the most important production of France) is, in the greater

eign, and under which are comprehended the greater part of the
frontier provinces; and, thirdly, those provinces which are said to

part of the provinces, subject to particular restraints arising from
the favour which has been shown to the vineyards of particular

be treated as foreign, or which, because they are allowed a free
commerce with foreign countries, are, in their commerce with the

provinces and districts above those of others. The provinces most
famous for their wines, it will be found, I believe, are those in

other provinces of France, subjected to the same duties as other
foreign countries. These are Alsace, the three bishoprics of Mentz,

which the trade in that article is subject to the fewest restraints of
this kind. The extensive market which such provinces enjoy, en-

Toul, and Verdun, and the three cities of Dunkirk, Bayonne, and
Marseilles. Both in the provinces of the five great farms (called so

courages good management both in the cultivation of their vineyards, and in the subsequent preparation of their wines.

on account of an ancient division of the duties of customs into

Such various and complicated revenue laws are not peculiar to

743

The Wealth of Nations
France. The little duchy of Milan is divided into six provinces, in
each of which there is a different system of taxation, with regard to

and skill which it requires to manage so very complicated a concern. Government, by establishing an administration under their

several different sorts of consumable goods. The still smaller territories of the duke of Parma are divided into three or four, each of

own immediate inspection, of the same kind with that which the
farmer establishes, might at least save this profit, which is almost

which has, in the same manner, a system of its own. Under such
absurd management, nothing but the great fertility of the soil, and

always exorbitant. To farm any considerable branch of the public
revenue requires either a great capital, or a great credit; circum-

happiness of the climate, could preserve such countries from soon
relapsing into the lowest state of poverty and barbarism.

stances which would alone restrain the competition for such an
undertaking to a very small number of people. Of the few who

Taxes upon consumable commodities may either he levied by
an administration, of which the officers are appointed by

have this capital or credit, a still smaller number have the necessary knowledge or experience; another circumstance which restrains

govermnent, and are immediately accountable to government, of
which the revenue must, in this case, vary from year to year, ac-

the competition still further. The very few who are in condition to
become competitors, find it more for their interest to combine

cording to the occasional variations in the produce of the tax; or
they may be let in farm for a rent certain, the farmer being al-

together; to become copartners, instead of competitors; and, when
the farm is set up to auction, to offer no rent but what is much

lowed to appoint his own officers, who, though obliged to levy
the tax in the manner directed by the law, are under his immediate

below the real value. In countries where the public revenues are in
farm, the farmers are generally the most opulent people. Their

inspection, and are immediately accountable to him. The best and
most frugal way of levying a tax can never be by farm. Over and

wealth would alone excite the public indignation; and the vanity
which almost always accompanies such upstart fortunes, the fool-

above what is necessary for paying the stipulated rent, the salaries
of the officers, and the whole expense of administration, the farmer

ish ostentation with which they commonly display that wealth,
excite that indignation still more.

must always draw from the produce of the tax a certain profit,
proportioned at least to the advance which he makes, to the risk

The farmers of the public revenue never find the laws too severe, which punish any attempt to evade the payment of a tax.

which he runs, to the trouble which he is at, and to the knowledge

They have no bowels for the contributors, who are not their sub-

744

Adam Smith
jects, and whose universal bankruptcy, if it should happen the day
after the farm is expired, would not much affect their interest. In

profits upon the people; the profit of the farmer, and the still more
exorbitant one of the monopolist. Tobacco being a luxury, every

the greatest exigencies of the state, when the anxiety of the sovereign for the exact payment of his revenue is necessarily the great-

man is allowed to buy or not to buy as he chuses; but salt being a
necessary, every man is obliged to buy of the farmer a certain quan-

est, they seldom fail to complain, that without laws more rigorous
than those which actually took place, it will be impossible for

tity of it; because, if he did not buy this quantity of the farmer, he
would, it is presumed, buy it of some smuggler. The taxes upon

them to pay even the usual rent. In those moments of public distress, their commands cannot be disputed. The revenue laws, there-

both commodities are exorbitant. The temptation to smuggle,
consequently, is to many people irresistible; while, at the same

fore, become gradually more and more severe. The most sanguinary are always to be found in countries where the greater part of

time, the rigour of the law, and the vigilance of the farmer’s officers, render the yielding to the temptation almost certainly ruin-

the public revenue is in farm; the mildest, in countries where it is
levied under the immediate inspection of the sovereign. Even a

ous. The smuggling of salt and tobacco sends every year several
hundred people to the galleys, besides a very considerable number

bad sovereign feels more compassion for his people than can ever
be expected from the farmers of his revenue. He knows that the

whom it sends to the gibbet. Those taxes, levied in this manner,
yield a very considerable revenue to government. In 1767, the

permanent grandeur of his family depends upon the prosperity of
his people, and he will never knowingly ruin that prosperity for

farm of tobacco was let for twenty-two millions five hundred and
forty-one thousand two hundred and seventy-eight livres a-year;

the sake of any momentary interest of his own. It is otherwise
with the farmers of his revenue, whose grandeur may frequently

that of salt for thirty-six millions four hundred and ninety-two
thousand four hundred and four livres. The farm, in both cases,

be the effect of the ruin, and not of the prosperity, of his people.
A tax is sometimes not only farmed for a certain rent, but the

was to commence in 1768, and to last for six years. Those who
consider the blood of the people as nothing, in comparison with

farmer has, besides, the monopoly of the commodity taxed. In
France, the duties upon tobacco and salt are levied in this manner.

the revenue of the prince, may, perhaps, approve of this method
of levying taxes. Similar taxes and monopolies of salt and tobacco

In such cases, the farmer, instead of one, levies two exorbitant

have been established in many other countries, particularly in the

745

The Wealth of Nations
Austrian and Prussian dominions, and in the greater part of the
states of Italy.

den of the taille, it is acknowledged, falls finally upon the proprietors of land; and as the greater part of the capitation is assessed

In France, the greater part of the actual revenue of the crown is
derived from eight different sources; the taille, the capitation, the

upon those who are subject to the taille, at so much a-pound of
that other tax, the final payment of the greater part of it must

two vingtiemes, the gabelles, the aides, the traites, the domaine,
and the farm of tobacco. The live last are, in the greater part of the

likewise fall upon the same order of people. Though the number
of the vingtiemes, therefore, was increased, so as to produce an

provinces, under farm. The three first are everywhere levied by an
administration, under the immediate inspection and direction of

additional revenue equal to the amount of both those taxes, the
superior ranks of people might not be more burdened than they

government; and it is universally acknowledged, that in proportion to what they take out of the pockets of the people, they bring

are at present; many individuals, no doubt, would, on account of
the great inequalities with which the taille is commonly assessed

more into the treasury of the prince than the other five, of which
the administration is much more wasteful and expensive.

upon the estates and tenants of different individuals. The interest
and opposition of such favoured subjects, are the obstacles most

The finances of France seem, in their present state, to admit of
three very obvious reformations. First, by abolishing the taille and

likely to prevent this, or any other reformation of the same kind.
Secondly, by rendering the gabelle, the aides, the traites, the taxes

the capitation, and by increasing the number of the vingtiemes, so
as to produce an additional revenue equal to the amount of those

upon tobacco, all the different customs and excises, uniform in all
the different parts of the kingdom, those taxes might be levied at

other taxes, the revenue of the crown might be preserved; the expense of collection might be much diminished; the vexation of

much less expense, and the interior commerce of the kingdom
might be rendered as free as that of England. Thirdly, and lastly,

the inferior ranks of people, which the taille and capitation occasion, might be entirely prevented; and the superior ranks might

by subjecting all those taxes to an administration under the immediate inspection and direction or government, the exorbitant

not be more burdened than the greater part of them are at present.
The vingtieme, I have already observed, is a tax very nearly of the

profits of the farmers-general might be added to the revenue of
the state. The opposition arising from the private interest of indi-

same kind with what is called the land tax of England. The bur-

viduals, is likely to be as effectual for preventing the two last as the

746

Adam Smith
first-mentioned scheme of reformation.
The French system of taxation seems, in every respect, inferior

what might have been expected, had the people contributed in
the same proportion to their numbers as the people of Great Brit-

to the British. In Great Britain, ten millions sterling are annually
levied upon less than eight millions of people, without its being

ain. The people of France, however, it is generally acknowledged,
are much more oppressed by taxes than the people of Great Brit-

possible to say that any particular order is oppressed. From the
Collections of the Abbé Expilly, and the observations of the au-

ain. France, however, is certainly the great empire in Europe, which,
after that of Great Britain, enjoys the mildest and most indulgent

thor of the Essay upon the Legislation and Commerce of Corn, it
appears probable that France, including the provinces of Lorraine

government.
In Holland, the heavy taxes upon the necessaries of life have ru-

and Bar, contains about twenty-three or twenty-four millions of
people; three times the number, perhaps, contained in Great Brit-

ined, it is said, their principal manufacturers, and are likely to discourage, gradually, even their fisheries and their trade in ship-build-

ain. The soil and climate of France are better than those of Great
Britain. The country has been much longer in a state of improve-

ing. The taxes upon the necessaries of life are inconsiderable in Great
Britain, and no manufacture has hitherto been ruined by them. The

ment and cultivation, and is, upon that account, better stocked
with all those things which it requires a long time to raise up and

British taxes which bear hardest on manufactures, are some duties
upon the importation of raw materials, particularly upon that of

accumulate; such as great towns, and convenient and well-built
houses, both in town and country. With these advantages, it might

raw silk. The revenue of the States-General and of the different cities, however, is said to amount to more than five millions two hun-

be expected, that in France a revenue of thirty millions might be
levied for the support of the state, with as little inconvenience as a

dred and fifty thousand pounds sterling; and as the inhabitants of
the United Provinces cannot well be supposed to amount to more

revenue of ten millions is in Great Britain. In 1765 and 1766, the
whole revenue paid into the treasury of France, according to the

than a third part of those of Great Britain, they must, in proportion
to their number, be much more heavily taxed.

best, though, I acknowledge, very imperfect accounts which I could
get of it, usually run between 308 and 325 millions of livres; that

After all the proper subjects of taxation have been exhausted, if
the exigencies of the state still continue to require new taxes, they

is, it did not amount to fifteen millions sterling; not the half of

must be imposed upon improper ones. The taxes upon the neces-

747

The Wealth of Nations
saries of life, therefore, may be no impeachment of the wisdom of
that republic, which, in order to acquire and to maintain its inde-

which should annihilate altogether the importance of those wealthy
merchants, would soon render it disagreeable to them to live in a

pendency, has, in spite of its meat frugality, been involved in such
expensive wars as have obliged it to contract great debts. The sin-

country where they were no longer likely to be much respected.
They would remove both their residence and their capital to some

gular countries of Holland and Zealand, besides, require a considerable expense even to preserve their existence, or to prevent their

other country, and the industry and commerce of Holland would
soon follow the capitals which supported them.

being swallowed up by the sea, which must have contributed to
increase considerably the load of taxes in those two provinces. The
republican form of government seems to be the principal support
of the present grandeur of Holland. The owners of great capitals,
the great mercantile families, have generally either some direct
share, or some indirect influence, in the administration of that
government. For the sake of the respect and authority which they
derive from this situation, they are willing to live in a country
where their capital, if they employ it themselves, will bring them
less profit, and if they lend it to another, less interest; and where
the very moderate revenue which they can draw from it will purchase less of the necessaries and conveniencies of life than in any
other part of Europe. The residence of such wealthy people necessarily keeps alive, in spite of all disadvantages, a certain degree of
industry in the country. Any public calamity which should destroy the republican form of government, which should throw the
whole administration into the hands of nobles and of soldiers,

748

Adam Smith

CHAPTER III

oured to show, in the same book, are expenses by which people are
not very apt to ruin themselves. There is not, perhaps, any selfish

OF PUBLIC DEBTS

pleasure so frivolous, of which the pursuit has not sometimes ruined even sensible men. A passion for cock-fighting has ruined

IN THAT RUDE STATE OF SOCIETY which precedes the extension of

many. But the instances, I believe, are not very numerous, of people
who have been ruined by a hospitality or liberality of this kind;

commerce and the improvement of manufactures; when those expensive luxuries, which commerce and manufactures can alone
introduce, are altogether unknown; the person who possesses a
large revenue, I have endeavoured to show in the third book of
this Inquiry, can spend or enjoy that revenue in no other way than
by maintaining nearly as many people as it can maintain. A large
revenue may at all times be said to consist in the command of a
large quantity of the necessaries of life. In that rude state of things,
it is commonly paid in a large quantity of those necessaries, in the
materials of plain food and coarse clothing, in corn and cattle, in
wool and raw hides. When neither commerce nor manufactures
furnish any thing for which the owner can exchange the greater
part of those materials which are over and above his own consumption, he can do nothing with the surplus, but feed and clothe
nearly as many people as it will feed and clothe. A hospitality in
which there is no luxury, and a liberality in which there is no
ostentation, occasion, in this situation of things, the principal expenses of the rich and the great. But these I have likewise endeav-

though the hospitality of luxury, and the liberality of ostentation
have ruined many. Among our feudal ancestors, the long time
during which estates used to continue in the same family, sufficiently demonstrates the general disposition of people to live within
their income. Though the rustic hospitality, constantly exercised
by the great landholders, may not, to us in the present times, seem
consistent with that order which we are apt to consider as inseparably connected with good economy; yet we must certainly allow
them to have been at least so far frugal, as not commonly to have
spent their whole income. A part of their wool and raw hides, they
had generally an opportunity of selling for money. Some part of
this money, perhaps, they spent in purchasing the few objects of
vanity and luxury, with which the circumstances of the times could
furnish them; but some part of it they seem commonly to have
hoarded. They could not well, indeed, do any thing else but hoard
whatever money they saved. To trade, was disgraceful to a gentleman; and to lend money at interest, which at that time was con-

749

The Wealth of Nations
sidered as usury, and prohibited bylaw, would have been still more
so. In those times of violence and disorder, besides, it was conve-

sary; so that the expense, even of a sovereign, like that of any other
great lord can be employed in scarce any thing but bounty to his

nient to have a hoard of money at hand, that in case they should
be driven from their own home, they might have something of

tenants, and hospitality to his retainers. But bounty and hospitality very seldom lead to extravagance; though vanity almost always

known value to carry with them to some place of safety. The same
violence which made it convenient to hoard, made it equally con-

does. All the ancient sovereigns of Europe, accordingly, it has already been observed, had treasures. Every Tartar chief, in the present

venient to conceal the hoard. The frequency of treasure-trove, or
of treasure found, of which no owner was known, sufficiently dem-

times, is said to have one.
In a commercial country, abounding with every sort of expen-

onstrates the frequency, in those times, both of hoarding and of
concealing the hoard. Treasure-trove was then considered as an

sive luxury, the sovereign, in the same manner as almost all the
great proprietors in his dominions, naturally spends a great part

important branch of the revenue of the sovereign. All the treasuretrove of the kingdom would scarce, perhaps, in the present times,

of his revenue in purchasing those luxuries. His own and the
neighbouring countries supply him abundantly with all the costly

make an important branch of the revenue of a private gentleman
of a good estate.

trinkets which compose the splendid, but insignificant, pageantry
of a court. For the sake of an inferior pageantry of the same kind,

The same disposition, to save and to hoard, prevailed in the
sovereign, as well as in the subjects. Among nations, to whom

his nobles dismiss their retainers, make their tenants independent,
and become gradually themselves as insignificant as the greater

commerce and manufacture are little known, the sovereign, it has
already been observed in the Fourth book, is in a situation which

part of the wealthy burghers in his dominions. The same frivolous
passions, which influence their conduct, influence his. How can it

naturally disposes him to the parsimony requisite for accumulation. In that situation, the expense, even of a sovereign, cannot be

be supposed that he should be the only rich man in his dominions
who is insensible to pleasures of this kind? If he does not, what he

directed by that vanity which delights in the gaudy finery of a
court. The ignorance of the times affords but few of the trinkets in

is very likely to do, spend upon those pleasures so great a part of
his revenue as to debilitate very much the defensive power of the

which that finery consists. Standing armies are not then neces-

state, it cannot well be expected that he should not spend upon

750

Adam Smith
them all that part of it which is over and above what is necessary
for supporting that defensive power. His ordinary expense becomes

the defence of the state; and consequently, a revenue three or four
times greater than the peace revenue. Supposing that the sover-

equal to his ordinary revenue, and it is well if it does not frequently exceed it. The amassing of treasure can no longer be ex-

eign should have, what he scarce ever has, the immediate means of
augmenting his revenue in proportion to the augmentation of his

pected; and when extraordinary exigencies require extraordinary
expenses, he must necessarily call upon his subjects for an extraor-

expense; yet still the produce of the taxes, from which this increase
of revenue must be drawn, will not begin to come into the trea-

dinary aid. The present and the late king of Prussia are the only
great princes of Europe, who, since the death of Henry IV. of

sury, till perhaps ten or twelve months after they are imposed. But
the moment in which war begins, or rather the moment in which

France, in 1610, are supposed to have amassed any considerable
treasure. The parsimony which leads to accumulation has become

it appears likely to begin, the army must be augmented, the fleet
must be fitted out, the garrisoned towns must be put into a pos-

almost as rare in republican as in monarchical governments. The
Italian republics, the United Provinces of the Netherlands, are all

ture of defence; that army, that fleet, those garrisoned towns, must
be furnished with arms, ammunition, and provisions. An imme-

in debt. The canton of Berne is the single republic in Europe which
has amassed any considerable treasure. The other Swiss republics

diate and great expense must be incurred in that moment of immediate danger, which will not wait for the gradual and slow re-

have not. The taste for some sort of pageantry, for splendid buildings, at least, and other public ornaments, frequently prevails as

turns of the new taxes. In this exigency, government can have no
other resource but in borrowing.

much in the apparently sober senate-house of a little republic, as
in the dissipated court of the greatest king.

The same commercial state of society which, by the operation
of moral causes, brings government in this manner into the neces-

The want of parsimony, in time of peace, imposes the necessity
of contracting debt in time of war. When war comes, there is no

sity of borrowing, produces in the subjects both an ability and an
inclination to lend. If it commonly brings along with it the neces-

money in the treasury, but what is necessary for carrying on the
ordinary expense of the peace establishment. In war, an establish-

sity of borrowing, it likewise brings with it the facility of doing so.
A country abounding with merchants and manufacturers, nec-

ment of three or four times that expense becomes necessary for

essarily abounds with a set of people through whose hands, not

751

The Wealth of Nations
only their own capitals, but the capitals of all those who either
lend them money, or trust them with goods, pass as frequently, or

ordinary occasions, to trust their property to the protection of a
particular government, disposes them, upon extraordinary occa-

more frequently, than the revenue of a private man, who, without
trade or business, lives upon his income, passes through his hands.

sions, to trust that government with the use of their property. By
lending money to government, they do not even for a moment

The revenue of such a man can regularly pass through his hands
only once in a year. But the whole amount of the capital and

diminish their ability to carry on their trade and manufactures; on
the contrary, they commonly augment it. The necessities of the

credit of a merchant, who deals in a trade of which the returns are
very quick, may sometimes pass through his hands two, three, or

state render government, upon most occasions willing to borrow
upon terms extremely advantageous to the lender. The security

four times in a year. A country abounding with merchants and
manufacturers, therefore, necessarily abounds with a set of people,

which it grants to the original creditor, is made transferable to any
other creditor; and from the universal confidence in the justice of

who have it at all times in their power to advance, if they chuse to
do so, a very large sum of money to government. Hence the abil-

the state, generally sells in the market for more than was originally
paid for it. The merchant or monied man makes money by lend-

ity in the subjects of a commercial state to lend.
Commerce and manufactures can seldom flourish long in any

ing money to government, and instead of diminishing. increases
his trading capital. He generally considers it as a favour, therefore,

state which does not enjoy a regular administration of justice; in
which the people do not feel themselves secure in the possession

when the administration admits him to a share in the first subscription for a new loan. Hence the inclination or willingness in

of their property; in which the faith of contracts is not supported
by law; and in which the authority of the state is not supposed to

the subjects of a commercial state to lend.
The government of such a state is very apt to repose itself upon

be regularly employed in enforcing the payment of debts from all
those who are able to pay. Commerce and manufactures, in short,

this ability and willingness of its subjects to lend it their money on
extraordinary occasions. It foresees the facility of borrowing, and

can seldom flourish in any state, in which there is not a certain
degree of confidence in the justice of government. The same con-

therefore dispenses itself from the duty of saving.
In a rude state of society, there are no great mercantile or manu-

fidence which disposes great merchants and manufacturers upon

facturing capitals. The individuals, who hoard whatever money

752

Adam Smith
they can save, and who conceal their hoard, do so from a distrust
of the justice of government; from a fear, that if it was known that

due, either for extraordinary services, or for services either not
provided for, or not paid at the time when they are performed;

they had a hoard, and where that hoard was to be found, they
would quickly be plundered. In such a state of things, few people

part of the extraordinaries of the army, navy, and ordnance, the
arrears of subsidies to foreign princes, those of seamen’s wages,

would be able, and nobody would be willing to lend their money
to government on extraordinary exigencies. The sovereign feels

etc. usually constitute a debt of the first kind. Navy and exchequer
bills, which are issued sometimes in payment of a part of such

that he must provide for such exigencies by saving, because he
foresees the absolute impossibility of borrowing. This foresight

debts, and sometimes for other purposes, constitute a debt of the
second kind; exchequer bills bearing interest from the day on which

increases still further his natural disposition to save.
The progress of the enormous debts which at present oppress,

they are issued, and navy bills six months after they are issued.
The bank of England, either by voluntarily discounting those bills

and will in the long-run probably ruin, all the great nations of
Europe, has been pretty uniform. Nations, like private men, have

at their current value, or by agreeing with government for certain
considerations to circulate exchequer bills, that is, to receive them

generally begun to borrow upon what may be called personal credit,
without assigning or mortgaging any particular fund for the pay-

at par, paying the interest which happens to be due upon them,
keeps up their value, and facilitates their circulation, and thereby

ment of the debt; and when this resource has failed them, they
have gone on to borrow upon assignments or mortgages of par-

frequently enables government to contract a very large debt of this
kind. In France, where there is no bank, the state bills (billets

ticular funds.
What is called the unfunded debt of Great Britain, is contracted

d’etat {See Examen des Reflections Politiques sur les Finances.})
have sometimes sold at sixty and seventy per cent. discount. Dur-

in the former of those two ways. It consists partly in a debt which
bears, or is supposed to bear, no interest, and which resembles the

ing the great recoinage in king William’s time, when the bank of
England thought proper to put a stop to its usual transactions,

debts that a private man contracts upon account; and partly in a
debt which bears interest, and which resembles what a private man

exchequer bills and tallies are said to have sold from twenty-five to
sixty per cent. discount; owing partly, no doubt, to the supposed

contracts upon his bill or promissory-note. The debts which are

instability of the new government established by the Revolution,

753

The Wealth of Nations
but partly, too, to the want of the support of the bank of England.
When this resource is exhausted, and it becomes necessary, in

in the supplies of the ensuing year. The only considerable branch
of the public revenue which yet remains unmortgaged, is thus

order to raise money, to assign or mortgage some particular branch
of the public revenue for the payment of the debt, government

regularly spent before it comes in. Like an improvident spendthrift, whose pressing occasions will not allow him to wait for the

has, upon different occasions, done this in two different ways.
Sometimes it has made this assignment or mortgage for a short

regular payment of his revenue, the state is in the constant practice of borrowing of its own factors and agents, and of paying

period of time only, a year, or a few years, for example; and sometimes for perpetuity. In the one case, the fund was supposed suffi-

interest for the use of its own money.
In the reign of king William, and during a great part of that of

cient to pay, within the limited time, both principal and interest
of the money borrowed. In the other, it was supposed sufficient to

queen Anne, before we had become so familiar as we are now with
the practice of perpetual funding, the greater part of the new taxes

pay the interest only, or a perpetual annuity equivalent to the interest, government being at liberty to redeem, at any time, this

were imposed but for a short period of time (for four, five, six, or
seven years only), and a great part of the grants of every year con-

annuity, upon paying back the principal sum borrowed. When
money was raised in the one way, it was said to be raised by antici-

sisted in loans upon anticipations of the produce of those taxes.
The produce being frequently insufficient for paying, within the

pation; when in the other, by perpetual funding, or, more shortly,
by funding.

limited term, the principal and interest of the money borrowed,
deficiencies arose; to make good which, it became necessary to

In Great Britain, the annual land and malt taxes are regularly
anticipated every year, by virtue of a borrowing clause constantly

prolong the term.
In 1697, by the 8th of William III., c. 20, the deficiencies of

inserted into the acts which impose them. The bank of England
generally advances at an interest, which, since the Revolution, has

several taxes were charged upon what was then called the first
general mortgage or fund, consisting of a prolongation to the first

varied from eight to three per cent., the sums of which those taxes
are granted, and receives payment as their produce gradually comes

of August 1706, of several different taxes, which would have expired within a shorter term, and of which the produce was accu-

in. If there is a deficiency, which there always is, it is provided for

mulated into one general fund. The deficiencies charged upon

754

Adam Smith
this prolonged term amounted to £5,160,459: 14: 9½.
In 1701, those duties, with some others, were still further pro-

The sum borrowed upon it was £1,296,552:9:11¾.
In 1711, the same duties (which at this time were thus subject

longed, for the like purposes, till the first of August 1710, and
were called the second general mortgage or fund. The deficiencies

to four different anticipations), together with several others, were
continued for ever, and made a fund for paying the interest of the

charged upon it amounted to £2,055,999: 7: 11½.
In 1707, those duties were still further prolonged, as a fund for

capital of the South-sea company, which had that year advanced
to government, for paying debts, and making good deficiencies,

new loans, to the first of August 1712, and were called the third
general mortgage or fund. The sum borrowed upon it was

the sum of £9,177,967:15:4d, the greatest loan which at that time
had ever been made.

£983,254:11:9¼.
In 1708, those duties were all (except the old subsidy of ton-

Before this period, the principal, so far as I have been able to
observe, the only taxes, which, in order to pay the interest of a debt,

nage and poundage, of which one moiety only was made a part of
this fund, and a duty upon the importation of Scotch linen, which

had been imposed for perpetuity, were those for paying the interest
of the money which had been advanced to government by the bank

had been taken off by the articles of union) still further continued, as a fund for new loans, to the first of August 1714, and were

and East-India company, and of what it was expected would be
advanced, but which was never advanced, by a projected land bank.

called the fourth general mortgage or fund. The sum borrowed
upon it was £925,176:9:2¼.

The bank fund at this time amounted to £3,375,027:17:10½, for
which was paid an annuity or interest of £206,501:15:5d. The East-

In 1709, those duties were all ( except the old subsidy of tonnage and poundage, which was now left out of this fund alto-

India fund amounted to £3,200,000, for which was paid an annuity or interest of £160,000; the bank fund being at six per cent., the

gether ) still further continued, for the same purpose, to the first
of August 1716, and were called the fifth general mortgage or

East-India fund at five per cent. interest.
In 1715, by the first of George I., c. 12, the different taxes which

fund. The sum borrowed upon it was £922,029:6s.
In 1710, those duties were again prolonged to the first of Au-

had been mortgaged for paying the bank annuity, together with
several others, which, by this act, were likewise rendered perpetual,

gust 1720, and were called the sixth general mortgage or fund.

were accumulated into one common fund, called the aggregate

755

The Wealth of Nations
fund, which was charged not only with the payment of the bank
annuity, but with several other annuities and burdens of different

ally taken care to overload it, by anticipating a second and a third
time, before the expiration of the first anticipation. The fund be-

kinds. This fund was afterwards augmented by the third of George
I., c.8., and by the fifth of George I., c. 3, and the different duties

coming in this manner altogether insufficient for paying both principal and interest of the money borrowed upon it, it became nec-

which were then added to it were likewise rendered perpetual.
In 1717, by the third of George I., c. 7, several other taxes were

essary to charge it with the interest only, or a perpetual annuity
equal to the interest; and such improvident anticipations neces-

rendered perpetual, and accumulated into another common fund,
called the general fund, for the payment of certain annuities,

sarily gave birth to the more ruinous practice of perpetual funding. But though this practice necessarily puts off the liberation of

amounting in the whole to £724,849:6:10½.
In consequence of those different acts, the greater part of the

the public revenue from a fixed period, to one so indefinite that it
is not very likely ever to arrive; yet, as a greater sum can, in all

taxes, which before had been anticipated only for a short term of
years were rendered perpetual, as a fund for paying, not the capi-

cases, be raised by this new practice than by the old one of anticipation, the former, when men have once become familiar with it,

tal, but the interest only, of the money which had been borrowed
upon them by different successive anticipations.

has, in the great exigencies of the state, been universally preferred
to the latter. To relieve the present exigency, is always the object

Had money never been raised but by anticipation, the course of
a few years would have liberated the public revenue, without any

which principally interests those immediately concerned in the
administration of public affairs. The future liberation of the pub-

other attention of government besides that of not overloading the
fund, by charging it with more debt than it could pay within the

lic revenue they leave to the care of posterity.
During the reign of queen Anne, the market rate of interest had

limited term, and not of anticipating a second time before the
expiration of the first anticipation. But the greater part of Euro-

fallen from six to five per cent.; and, in the twelfth year of her
reign, five per cent. was declared to be the highest rate which could

pean governments have been incapable of those attentions. They
have frequently overloaded the fund, even upon the first anticipa-

lawfully be taken for money borrowed upon private security. Soon
after the greater part of the temporary taxes of Great Britain had

tion; and when this happened not to be the case, they have gener-

been rendered perpetual, and distributed into the aggregate, South-

756

Adam Smith
sea, and general funds, the creditors of the public, like those of
private persons, were induced to accept of five per cent. for the

by a perpetual funding, there are two other methods, which hold
a sort of middle place between them; these are, that of borrowing

interest of their money, which occasioned a saving of one per cent.
upon the capital of the greater part or the debts which had been

upon annuities for terms of years, and that of borrowing upon
annuities for lives.

thus funded for perpetuity, or of one-sixth of the greater part of
the annuities which were paid out of the three great funds above

During the reigns of king William and queen Anne, large sums
were frequently borrowed upon annuities for terms of years, which

mentioned. This saving left a considerable surplus in the produce
of the different taxes which had been accumulated into those funds,

were sometimes longer and sometimes shorter. In 1695, an act
was passed for borrowing one million upon an annuity of four-

over and above what was necessary for paying the annuities which
were now charged upon them, and laid the foundation of what

teen per cent., or £140,000 a-year, for sixteen years. In 1691, an
act was passed for borrowing a million upon annuities for lives,

has since been called the sinking fund. In 1717, it amounted to
£523,454:7:7½. In 1727, the interest of the greater part of the

upon terms which, in the present times, would appear very advantageous; but the subscription was not filled up. In the follow-

public debts was still further reduced to four per cent.; and, in
1753 and 1757, to three and a-half, and three per cent., which

ing year, the deficiency was made good, by borrowing upon annuities for lives, at fourteen per cent. or a little more than seven years

reductions still further augmented the sinking fund.
A sinking fund, though instituted for the payment of old, facili-

purchase. In 1695, the persons who had purchased those annuities were allowed to exchange them for others of ninety-six years,

tates very much the contracting of new debts. It is a subsidiary
fund, always at hand, to be mortgaged in aid of any other doubt-

upon paying into the exchequer sixty-three pounds in the hundred; that is, the difference between fourteen per cent. for life,

ful fund, upon which money is proposed to be raised in any exigency of the state. Whether the sinking fund of Great Britain has

and fourteen per cent. for ninety-six years, was sold for sixty-three
pounds, or for four and a-half years purchase. Such was the sup-

been more frequently applied to the one or to other of those two
purposes, will sufficiently appear by and by.

posed instability of government, that even these terms procured
few purchasers. In the reign of queen Anne, money was, upon

Besides those two methods of borrowing, by anticipations and

different occasions, borrowed both upon annuities for lives, and

757

The Wealth of Nations
upon annuities for terms of thirty-two, of eighty-nine, of ninetyeight, and of ninety-nine years. In 1719, the proprietors of the

nearly the same number of purchasers. The subscribers to a new
loan, who mean generally to sell their subscription as soon as pos-

annuities for thirty-two years were induced to accept, in lieu of
them, South-sea stock to the amount of eleven and a-half years

sible, prefer greatly a perpetual annuity, redeemable by parliament,
to an irredeemable annuity, for a long term of years, of only equal

purchase of the annuities, together with an additional quantity of
stock, equal to the arrears which happened then to be due upon

amount. The value of the former may be supposed always the
same, or very nearly the same; and it makes, therefore, a more

them. In 1720, the greater part of the other annuities for terms of
years, both long and short, were subscribed into the same fund.

convenient transferable stock than the latter.
During the two last-mentioned wars, annuities, either for terms

The long annuities, at that time, amounted to £666,821: 8:3½ ayear. On the 5th of January 1775, the remainder of them, or what

of years or for lives, were seldom granted, but as premiums to the
subscribers of a new loan, over and above the redeemable annuity or

was not subscribed at that time, amounted only to £136,453:12:8d.
During the two wars which began in 1739 and in 1755, little

interest, upon the credit of which the loan was supposed to be made.
They were granted, not as the proper fund upon which the money

money was borrowed, either upon annuities for terms of years, or
upon those for lives. An annuity for ninety-eight or ninety-nine

was borrowed, but as an additional encouragement to the lender.
Annuities for lives have occasionally been granted in two differ-

years, however, is worth nearly as much as a perpetuity, and should
therefore, one might think, be a fund for borrowing nearly as much.

ent ways; either upon separate lives, or upon lots of lives, which,
in French, are called tontines, from the name of their inventor.

But those who, in order to make family settlements, and to provide for remote futurity, buy into the public stocks, would not

When annuities are granted upon separate lives, the death of every individual annuitant disburdens the public revenue, so far as

care to purchase into one of which the value was continually diminishing; and such people make a very considerable proportion,

it was affected by his annuity. When annuities are granted upon
tontines, the liberation of the public revenue does not commence

both of the proprietors and purchasers of stock. An annuity for a
long term of years, therefore, though its intrinsic value may be

till the death of all the annuitants comprehended in one lot, which
may sometimes consist of twenty or thirty persons, of whom the

very nearly the same with that of a perpetual annuity, will not find

survivors succeed to the annuities of all those who die before them;

758

Adam Smith
the last survivor succeeding to the annuities of the whole lot. Upon
the same revenue, more money can always be raised by tontines

are not exact; but having been presented by so very respectable a
body as approximations to the truth, they may, I apprehend, be

than by annuities for separate lives. An annuity, with a right of
survivorship, is really worth more than an equal annuity for a

considered as such. It is not the different degrees of anxiety in the
two governments of France and England for the liberation of the

separate life; and, from the confidence which every man naturally
has in his own good fortune, the principle upon which is founded

public revenue, which occasions this difference in their respective
modes of borrowing; it arises altogether from the different views

the success of all lotteries, such an annuity generally sells for something more than it is worth. In countries where it is usual for

and interests of the lenders.
In England, the seat of government being in the greatest mer-

government to raise money by granting annuities, tontines are,
upon this account, generally preferred to annuities for separate

cantile city in the world, the merchants are generally the people
who advance money to government. By advancing it, they do not

lives. The expedient which will raise most money, is almost always
preferred to that which is likely to bring about, in the speediest

mean to diminish, but, on the contrary, to increase their mercantile capitals; and unless they expected to sell, with some profit,

manner, the liberation of the public revenue.
In France, a much greater proportion of the public debts con-

their share in the subscription for a new loan, they never would
subscribe. But if, by advancing their money, they were to pur-

sists in annuities for lives than in England. According to a memoir
presented by the parliament of Bourdeaux to the king, in 1764,

chase, instead of perpetual annuities, annuities for lives only,
whether their own or those of other people, they would not al-

the whole public debt of France is estimated at twenty-four hundred millions of livres; of which the capital, for which annuities

ways be so likely to sell them with a profit. Annuities upon their
own lives they would always sell with loss; because no man will

for lives had been granted, is supposed to amount to three hundred millions, the eighth part of the whole public debt. The annu-

give for an annuity upon the life of another, whose age and state
of health are nearly the same with his own, the same price which

ities themselves are computed to amount to thirty millions a-year,
the fourth part of one hundred and twenty millions, the supposed

he would give for one upon his own. An annuity upon the life of
a third person, indeed, is, no doubt, of equal value to the buyer

interest of that whole debt. These estimations, I know very well,

and the seller; but its real value begins to diminish from the mo-

759

The Wealth of Nations
ment it is granted, and continues to do so, more and more, as long
as it subsists. It can never, therefore, make so convenient a trans-

just as long, and no longer, than they wish it to do.
The ordinary expense of the greater part of modern govern-

ferable stock as a perpetual annuity, of which the real value may
be supposed always the same, or very nearly the same.

ments, in time of peace, being equal, or nearly equal, to their ordinary revenue, when war comes, they are both unwilling and un-

In France, the seat of government not being in a great mercantile city, merchants do not make so great a proportion of the people

able to increase their revenue in proportion to the increase of their
expense. They are unwilling, for fear of offending the people, who,

who advance money to government. The people concerned in the
finances, the farmers-general, the receivers of the taxes which are

by so great and so sudden an increase of taxes, would soon be
disgusted with the war; and they are unable, from not well know-

not in farm, the court-bankers, etc. make the greater part of those
who advance their money in all public exigencies. Such people are

ing what taxes would be sufficient to produce the revenue wanted.
The facility of borrowing delivers them from the embarrassment

commonly men of mean birth, but of great wealth, and frequently
of great pride. They are too proud to marry their equals, and women

which this fear and inability would otherwise occasion. By means
of borrowing, they are enabled, with a very moderate increase of

of quality disdain to marry them. They frequently resolve, therefore, to live bachelors; and having neither any families of their

taxes, to raise, from year to year, money sufficient for carrying on
the war; and by the practice of perpetual funding, they are en-

own, nor much regard for those of their relations, whom they are
not always very fond of acknowledging, they desire only to live in

abled, with the smallest possible increase of taxes, to raise annually the largest possible sum of money. In great empires, the people

splendour during their own time, and are not unwilling that their
fortune should end with themselves. The number of rich people,

who live in the capital, and in the provinces remote from the scene
of action, feel, many of them, scarce any inconveniency from the

besides, who are either averse to marry, or whose condition of life
renders it either improper or inconvenient for them to do so, is

war, but enjoy, at their ease, the amusement of reading in the newspapers the exploits of their own fleets and armies. To them this

much greater in France than in England. To such people, who
have little or no care for posterity, nothing can be more conve-

amusement compensates the small difference between the taxes
which they pay on account of the war, and those which they had

nient than to exchange their capital for a revenue, which is to last

been accustomed to pay in time of peace. They are commonly

760

Adam Smith
dissatisfied with the return of peace, which puts an end to their
amusement, and to a thousand visionary hopes of conquest and

duction of that interest; that of Holland in 1655, and that of the
ecclesiastical state in 1685, were both formed in this manner. Hence

national glory, from a longer continuance of the war.
The return of peace, indeed, seldom relieves them from the

the usual insufficiency of such funds.
During the most profound peace, various events occur, which

greater part of the taxes imposed during the war. These are mortgaged for the interest of the debt contracted, in order to carry it

require an extraordinary expense; and government finds it always
more convenient to defray this expense by misapplying the sink-

on. If, over and above paying the interest of this debt, and defraying the ordinary expense of government, the old revenue, together

ing fund, than by imposing a new tax. Every new tax is immediately felt more or less by the people. It occasions always some

with the new taxes, produce some surplus revenue, it may, perhaps, be converted into a sinking fund for paying off the debt.

murmur, and meets with some opposition. The more taxes may
have been multiplied, the higher they may have been raised upon

But, in the first place, this sinking fund, even supposing it should
be applied to no other purpose, is generally altogether inadequate

every different subject of taxation; the more loudly the people
complain of every new tax, the more difficult it becomes, too,

for paying, in the course of any period during which it can reasonably be expected that peace should continue, the whole debt con-

either to find out new subjects of taxation, or to raise much higher
the taxes already imposed upon the old. A momentary suspension

tracted during the war; and, in the second place, this fund is almost always applied to other purposes.

of the payment of debt is not immediately felt by the people, and
occasions neither murmur nor complaint. To borrow of the sink-

The new taxes were imposed for the sole purpose of paying the
interest of the money borrowed upon them. If they produce more,

ing fund is always an obvious and easy expedient for getting out of
the present difficulty. The more the public debts may have been

it is generally something which was neither intended nor expected,
and is, therefore, seldom very considerable. Sinking funds have

accumulated, the more necessary it may have become to study to
reduce them; the more dangerous, the more ruinous it may be to

generally arisen, not so much from any surplus of the taxes which
was over and above what was necessary for paying the interest or

misapply any part of the sinking fund; the less likely is the public
debt to be reduced to any considerable degree, the more likely, the

annuity originally charged upon them, as from a subsequent re-

more certainly, is the sinking fund to be misapplied towards de-

761

The Wealth of Nations
fraying all the extraordinary expenses which occur in time of peace.
When a nation is already overburdened with taxes, nothing but

In the war which began in 1702, and which was concluded by
the treaty of Utrecht, the public debts were still more accumu-

the necessities of a new war, nothing but either the animosity of
national vengeance, or the anxiety for national security, can in-

lated. On the 31st of December 1714, they amounted to
£53,681,076:5:6½. The subscription into the South-sea fund, of

duce the people to submit, with tolerable patience, to a new tax.
Hence the usual misapplication of the sinking fund.

the short and long annuities, increased the capital of the public
debt; so that, on the 31st of December 1722, it amounted to

In Great Britain, from the time that we had first recourse to the
ruinous expedient of perpetual funding, the reduction of the pub-

£55,282,978:1:3 5/6. The reduction of the debt began in 1723,
and went on so slowly, that, on the 31st of December 1739, dur-

lic debt, in time of peace, has never borne any proportion to its
accumulation in time of war. It was in the war which began in

ing seventeen years-of profound peace, the whole sum paid off
was no more than £8,328,554:17:11 3/12, the capital of the pub-

1668, and was concluded by the treaty of Ryswick, in 1697, that
the foundation of the present enormous debt of Great Britain was

lic debt, at that time, amounting to £46,954,623:3:4 7/12.
The Spanish war, which began in 1739, and the French war which

first laid.
On the 31st of December 1697, the public debts of Great Brit-

soon followed it, occasioned a further increase of the debt, which,
on the 31st of December 1748, after the war had been concluded

ain, funded and unfunded, amounted to £21,515,742:13:8½. A
great part of those debts had been contracted upon short anticipa-

by the treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle, amounted to £78,293,313:1:10¾.
The most profound peace, of 17 years continuance, had taken no

tions, and some part upon annuities for lives; so that, before the
31st of December 1701, in less than four years, there had partly

more than £8,328,354, 17:11¼ from it. A war, of less than nine
years continuance, added £31,338,689:18: 6 1/6 to it. {See James

been paid off; and partly reverted to the public, the sum of
£5,121,041:12:0¾d; a greater reduction of the public debt than

Postlethwaite’s History of the Public Revenue.}
During the administration of Mr. Pelham, the interest of the

has ever since been brought about in so short a period of time.
The remaining debt, therefore, amounted only to

public debt was reduced, or at least measures were taken for reducing it, from four to three per cent.; the sinking fund was in-

£16,394,701:1:7¼d.

creased, and some part of the public debt was paid off. In 1755,

762

Adam Smith
before the breaking out of the late war, the funded debt of Great
Britain amounted to £72,289,675. On the 5th of January 1763,

debt of more than seventy-five millions was contracted.
On the 5th of January 1775, the funded debt of Great Britain

at the conclusion of the peace, the funded debt amounted debt to
£122,603,336:8:2¼. The unfunded debt has been stated at

amounted to £124,996,086, 1:6¼d. The unfunded, exclusive of
a large civil-list debt, to £4,150,236:3:11 7/8. Both together, to

£13,927,589:2:2. But the expense occasioned by the war did not
end with the conclusion of the peace; so that, though on the 5th

£129,146,322:5:6. According to this account, the whole debt paid
off, during eleven years of profound peace, amounted only to

of January 1764, the funded debt was increased (partly by a new
loan, and partly by funding a part of the unfunded debt) to

£10,415,476:16:9 7/8. Even this small reduction of debt, however, has not been all made from the savings out of the ordinary

£129,586,789:10:1¾, there still remained (according to the very
well informed author of Considerations on the Trade and Finances

revenue of the state. Several extraneous sums, altogether independent of that ordinary revenue, have contributed towards it.

of Great Britain) an unfunded debt, which was brought to account in that and the following year, of £9,975,017: 12:2 15/44d.

Amongst these we may reckon an additional shilling in the pound
land tax, for three years; the two millions received from the East-

In 1764, therefore, the public debt of Great Britain, funded and
unfunded together, amounted, according to this author, to

India company, as indemnification for their territorial acquisitions;
and the one hundred and ten thousand pounds received from the

£139,561,807:2:4. The annuities for lives, too, which had been
granted as premiums to the subscribers to the new loans in 1757,

bank for the renewal of their charter. To these must be added several other sums, which, as they arose out of the late war, ought

estimated at fourteen years purchase, were valued at £472,500;
and the annuities for long terms of years, granted as premiums

perhaps to be considered as deductions from the expenses of it.
The principal are,

likewise, in 1761 and 1762, estimated at twenty-seven and a-half
years purchase, were valued at £6,826,875. During a peace of about

The produce of French prizes .............. £690,449: 18: 9 Com-

seven years continuance, the prudent and truly patriotic administration of Mr. Pelham was not able to pay off an old debt of six

position for French prisoners ...............

millions. During a war of nearly the same continuance, a new

763

670,000: 0: 0

The Wealth of Nations
What has been received from the sale of the ceded islands
.................................................... 95,500: 0: 0

involved us in an additional debt of more than one hundred millions. During a profound peace of eleven years, little more than

Total, .....................................£1,455,949: 18: 9

ten millions of debt was paid; during a war of seven years, more
than one hundred millions was contracted.} The new debt which

If we add to this sum the balance of the earl of Chatham’s and

will probably be contracted before the end of the next campaign,
may, perhaps, be nearly equal to all the old debt which has been

Mr. Calcraft’s accounts, and other army savings of the same kind,
together with what has been received from the bank, the East-

paid off from the savings out of the ordinary revenue of the state.
It would be altogether chimerical, therefore, to expect that the

India company, and the additional shilling in the pound land tax,
the whole must be a good deal more than five millions. The debt,

public debt should ever be completely discharged, by any savings
which are likely to be made from that ordinary revenue as it stands

therefore, which, since the peace, has been paid out of the savings
from the ordinary revenue of the state, has not, one year with

at present.
The public funds of the different indebted nations of Europe,

another, amounted to half a million a-year. The sinking fund has,
no doubt, been considerably augmented since the peace, by the

particularly those of England, have, by one author, been represented as the accumulation of a great capital, superadded to the

debt which had been paid off, by the reduction of the redeemable
four per cents to three per cents, and by the annuities for lives

other capital of the country, by means of which its trade is extended, its manufactures are multiplied, and its lands cultivated

which have fallen in; and, if peace were to continue, a million,
perhaps, might now be annually spared out of it towards the dis-

and improved, much beyond what they could have been by means
of that other capital only. He does not consider that the capital

charge of the debt. Another million, accordingly, was paid in the
course of last year; but at the same time, a large civil-list debt was

which the first creditors of the public advanced to government,
was, from the moment in which he advanced it, a certain portion

left unpaid, and we are now involved in a new war, which, in its
progress, may prove as expensive as any of our former wars. {It has

of the annual produce, turned away from serving in the function
of a capital, to serve in that of a revenue; from maintaining pro-

proved more expensive than any one of our former wars, and has

ductive labourers, to maintain unproductive ones, and to be spent

764

Adam Smith
and wasted, generally in the course of the year, without even the
hope of any future reproduction. In return for the capital which

When, for defraying the expense of government, a revenue is raised
within the year, from the produce of free or unmortgaged taxes, a

they advanced, they obtained, indeed, an annuity of the public
funds, in most cases, of more than equal value. This annuity, no

certain portion of the revenue of private people is only turned away
from maintaining one species of unproductive labour, towards main-

doubt, replaced to them their capital, and enabled them to carry
on their trade and business to the same, or, perhaps, to a greater

taining another. Some part of what they pay in those taxes, might,
no doubt, have been accumulated into capital, and consequently

extent than before; that is, they were enabled, either to borrow of
other people a new capital, upon the credit of this annuity or, by

employed in maintaining productive labour; but the greater part
would probably have been spent, and consequently employed in

selling it, to get from other people a new capital of their own,
equal, or superior, to that which they had advanced to govern-

maintaining unproductive labour. The public expense, however,
when defrayed in this manner, no doubt hinders, more or less, the

ment. This new capital, however, which they in this manner either bought or borrowed of other people, must have existed in the

further accumulation of new capital; but it does not necessarily occasion the destruction of any actually-existing capital.

country before, and must have been employed, as all capitals are,
in maintaining productive labour. When it came into the hands

When the public expense is defrayed by funding, it is defrayed
by the annual destruction of some capital which had before ex-

of those who had advanced their money to government, though it
was, in some respects, a new capital to them, it was not so to the

isted in the country; by the perversion of some portion of the
annual produce which had before been destined for the mainte-

country, but was only a capital withdrawn from certain employments, in order to be turned towards others. Though it replaced

nance of productive labour, towards that of unproductive labour.
As in this case, however, the taxes are lighter than they would have

to them what they had advanced to government, it did not replace
it to the country. Had they not advanced this capital to govern-

been, had a revenue sufficient for defraying the same expense been
raised within the year; the private revenue of individuals is neces-

ment, there would have been in the country two capitals, two
portions of the annual produce, instead of one, employed in main-

sarily less burdened, and consequently their ability to save and
accumulate some part of that revenue into capital, is a good deal

taining productive labour.

less impaired. If the method of funding destroys more old capital,

765

The Wealth of Nations
it, at the same time, hinders less the accumulation or acquisition
of new capital, than that of defraying the public expense by a

which the ability of private people to accumulate was somewhat
impaired, would occur more rarely, and be of shorter continu-

revenue raised within the year. Under the system of funding, the
frugality and industry of private people can more easily repair the

ance. Those, on the contrary, during which that ability was in the
highest vigour would be of much longer duration than they can

breaches which the waste and extravagance of government may
occasionally make in the general capital of the society.

well be under the system of funding.
When funding, besides, has made a certain progress, the multi-

It is only during the continuance of war, however, that the system of funding has this advantage over the other system. Were the

plication of taxes which it brings along with it, sometimes impairs
as much the ability of private people to accumulate, even in time

expense of war to be defrayed always by a revenue raised within
the year, the taxes from which that extraordinary revenue was drawn

of peace, as the other system would in time of war. The peace
revenue of Great Britain amounts at present to more than ten

would last no longer than the war. The ability of private people to
accumulate, though less during the war, would have been greater

millions a-year. If free and unmortgaged, it might be sufficient,
with proper management, and without contracting a shilling of

during the peace, than under the system of funding. War would
not necessarily have occasioned the destruction of any old capi-

new debt, to carry on the most vigorous war. The private revenue
of the inhabitants of Great Britain is at present as much incum-

tals, and peace would have occasioned the accumulation of many
more new. Wars would, in general, be more speedily concluded,

bered in time of peace, their ability to accumulate is as much impaired, as it would have been in the time of the most expensive

and less wantonly undertaken. The people feeling, during continuance of war, the complete burden of it, would soon grow weary

war, had the pernicious system of funding never been adopted.
In the payment of the interest of the public debt, it has been

of it; and government, in order to humour them, would not be
under the necessity of carrying it on longer than it was necessary

said, it is the right hand which pays the left. The money does not
go out of the country. It is only a part of the revenue of one set of

to do so. The foresight of the heavy and unavoidable burdens of
war would hinder the people from wantonly calling for it when

the inhabitants which is transferred to another; and the nation is
not a farthing the poorer. This apology is founded altogether in

there was no real or solid interest to fight for. The seasons during

the sophistry of the mercantile system; and, after the long exami-

766

Adam Smith
nation which I have already bestowed upon that system, it may,
perhaps, be unnecessary to say anything further about it. It sup-

may find himself altogether unable to make or maintain those
expensive improvements. When the landlord, however, ceases to

poses, besides, that the whole public debt is owing to the inhabitants of the country, which happens not to be true; the Dutch, as

do his part, it is altogether impossible that the tenant should continue to do his. As the distress of the landlord increases, the agri-

well as several other foreign nations, having a very considerable
share in our public funds. But though the whole debt were owing

culture of the country must necessarily decline.
When, by different taxes upon the necessaries and conveniencies

to the inhabitants of the country, it would not, upon that account, be less pernicious.

of life, the owners and employers of capital stock find, that whatever revenue they derive from it, will not, in a particular country,

Land and capital stock are the two original sources of all revenue, both private and public. Capital stock pays the wages of

purchase the same quantity of those necessaries and conveniencies
which an equal revenue would in almost any other, they will be

productive labour, whether employed in agriculture, manufactures,
or commerce. The management of those two original sources of

disposed to remove to some other. And when, in order to raise
those taxes, all or the greater part of merchants and manufactur-

revenue belongs to two different sets of people; the proprietors of
land, and the owners or employers of capital stock.

ers, that is, all or the greater part of the employers of great capitals,
come to be continually exposed to the mortifying and vexatious

The proprietor of land is interested, for the sake of his own
revenue, to keep his estate in as good condition as he can, by

visits of the tax-gatherers, this disposition to remove will soon be
changed into an actual removing. The industry of the country

building and repairing his tenants houses, by making and maintaining the necessary drains and inclosures, and all those other

will necessarily fall with the removal of the capital which supported it, and the ruin of trade and manufactures will follow the

expensive improvements which it properly belongs to the landlord to make and maintain. But, by different land taxes, the rev-

declension of agriculture.
To transfer from the owners of those two great sources of rev-

enue of the landlord may be so much diminished, and, by different duties upon the necessaries and conveniencies of life, that di-

enue, land, and capital stock, from the persons immediately interested in the good condition of every particular portion of land,

minished revenue may be rendered of so little real value, that he

and in the good management of every particular portion of capi-

767

The Wealth of Nations
tal stock, to another set of persons (the creditors of the public,
who have no such particular interest ), the greater part of the rev-

tion to its natural strength, been-still more enfeebled. The debts
of Spain are of very old standing. It was deeply in debt before the

enue arising from either, must, in the long-run, occasion both the
neglect of land, and the waste or removal of capital stock. A credi-

end of the sixteenth century, about a hundred years before England owed a shilling. France, notwithstanding all its natural re-

tor of the public has, no doubt, a general interest in the prosperity
of the agriculture, manufactures, and commerce of the country;

sources, languishes under an oppressive load of the same kind.
The republic of the United Provinces is as much enfeebled by its

and consequently in the good condition of its land, and in the
good management of its capital stock. Should there be any gen-

debts as either Genoa or Venice. Is it likely that, in Great Britain
alone, a practice, which has brought either weakness or dissolu-

eral failure or declension in any of these things, the produce of the
different taxes might no longer be sufficient to pay him the annu-

tion into every other country, should prove altogether innocent?
The system of taxation established in those different countries,

ity or interest which is due to him. But a creditor of the public,
considered merely as such, has no interest in the good condition

it may be said, is inferior to that of England. I believe it is so. But
it ought to be remembered, that when the wisest government has

of any particular portion of land, or in the good management of
any particular portion of capital stock. As a creditor of the public,

exhausted all the proper subjects of taxation, it must, in cases of
urgent necessity, have recourse to improper ones. The wise repub-

he has no knowledge of any such particular portion. He has no
inspection of it. He can have no care about it. Its ruin may in

lic of Holland has, upon some occasions, been obliged to have
recourse to taxes as inconvenient as the greater part of those of

some cases be unknown to him, and cannot directly affect him.
The practice of funding has gradually enfeebled every state which

Spain. Another war, begun before any considerable liberation of
the public revenue had been brought about, and growing in its

has adopted it. The Italian republics seem to have begun it. Genoa
and Venice, the only two remaining which can pretend to an in-

progress as expensive as the last war, may, from irresistible necessity, render the British system of taxation as oppressive as that of

dependent existence, have both been enfeebled by it. Spain seems
to have learned the practice from the Italian republics, and (its

Holland, or even as that of Spain. To the honour of our present
system of taxation, indeed, it has hitherto given so little embar-

taxes being probably less judicious than theirs) it has, in propor-

rassment to industry, that, during the course even of the most

768

Adam Smith
expensive wars, the frugality and good conduct of individuals seem
to have been able, by saving and accumulation, to repair all the

When national debts have once been accumulated to a certain
degree, there is scarce, I believe, a single instance of their having

breaches which the waste and extravagance of government had
made in the general capital of the society. At the conclusion of the

been fairly and completely paid. The liberation of the public revenue, if it has ever been brought about at all, has always been

late war, the most expensive that Great Britain ever waged, her
agriculture was as flourishing, her manufacturers as numerous and

brought about by a bankruptcy; sometimes by an avowed one,
though frequently by a pretended payment.

as fully employed, and her commerce as extensive, as they had
ever been before. The capital, therefore, which supported all those

The raising of the denomination of the coin has been the most
usual expedient by which a real public bankruptcy has been dis-

different branches of industry, must have been equal to what it
had ever been before. Since the peace, agriculture has been still

guised under the appearance of a pretended payment. If a sixpence, for example, should, either by act of parliament or royal

further improved; the rents of houses have risen in every town and
village of the country, a proof of the increasing wealth and rev-

proclamation, be raised to the denomination of a shilling, and
twenty sixpences to that of a pound sterling; the person who, un-

enue of the people; and the annual amount of the greater part of
the old taxes, of the principal branches of the excise and customs,

der the old denomination, had borrowed twenty shillings, or near
four ounces of silver, would, under the new, pay with twenty six-

in particular, has been continually increasing, an equally clear proof
of an increasing consumption, and consequently of an increasing

pences, or with something less than two ounces. A national debt
of about a hundred and twenty-eight millions, near the capital of

produce, which could alone support that consumption. Great
Britain seems to support with ease, a burden which, half a century

the funded and unfunded debt of Great Britain, might, in this
manner, be paid with about sixty-four millions of our present

ago, nobody believed her capable of supporting, Let us not, however, upon this account, rashly conclude that she is capable of

money. It would, indeed, be a pretended payment only, and the
creditors of the public would really be defrauded of ten shillings

supporting any burden; nor even be too confident that she could
support, without great distress, a burden a little greater than what

in the pound of what was due to them. The calamity, too, would
extend much further than to the creditors of the public, and those

has already been laid upon her.

of every private person would suffer a proportionable loss; and

769

The Wealth of Nations
this without any advantage, but in most cases with a great additional loss, to the creditors of the public. If the creditors of the

real bankruptcy, it has recourse to a juggling trick of this kind, so
easily seen through, and at the same time so extremely pernicious.

public, indeed, were generally much in debt to other people, they
might in some measure compensate their loss by paying their credi-

Almost all states, however, ancient as well as modern, when reduced to this necessity, have, upon some occasions, played this

tors in the same coin in which the public had paid them. But in
most countries, the creditors of the public are, the greater part of

very juggling trick. The Romans, at the end of the first Punic war,
reduced the As, the coin or denomination by which they com-

them, wealthy people, who stand more in the relation of creditors
than in that of debtors, towards the rest of their fellow citizens. A

puted the value of all their other coins, from containing twelve
ounces of copper, to contain only two ounces; that is, they raised

pretended payment of this kind, therefore, instead of alleviating,
aggravates, in most cases, the loss of the creditors of the public;

two ounces of copper to a denomination which had always before
expressed the value of twelve ounces. The republic was, in this

and, without any advantage to the public, extends the calamity to
a great number of other innocent people. It occasions a general

manner, enabled to pay the great debts which it had contracted
with the sixth part of what it really owed. So sudden and so great

and most pernicious subversion of the fortunes of private people;
enriching, in most cases, the idle and profuse debtor, at the ex-

a bankruptcy, we should in the present times be apt to imagine,
must have occasioned a very violent popular clamour. It does not

pense of the industrious and frugal creditor; and transporting a
great part of the national capital from the hands which were likely

appear to have occasioned any. The law which enacted it was, like
all other laws relating to the coin, introduced and carried through

to increase and improve it, to those who are likely to dissipate and
destroy it. When it becomes necessary for a state to declare itself

the assembly of the people by a tribune, and was probably a very
popular law. In Rome, as in all other ancient republics, the poor

bankrupt, in the same manner as when it becomes necessary for
an individual to do so, a fair, open, and avowed bankruptcy, is

people were constantly in debt to the rich and the great, who, in
order to secure their votes at the annual elections, used to lend

always the measure which is both least dishonourable to the debtor,
and least hurtful to the creditor. The honour of a state is surely

them money at exorbitant interest, which, being never paid, soon
accumulated into a sum too great either for the debtor to pay, or

very poorly provided for, when, in order to cover the disgrace of a

for any body else to pay for him. The debtor, for fear of a very

770

Adam Smith
severe execution, was obliged, without any further gratuity, to vote
for the candidate whom the creditor recommended. In spite of all

Punic war, the As was still further reduced, first, from two ounces
of copper to one ounce, and afterwards from one ounce to half an

the laws against bribery and corruption, the bounty of the candidates, together with the occasional distributions of coin which

ounce; that is, to the twenty-fourth part of its original value. By
combining the three Roman operations into one, a debt of a hun-

were ordered by the senate, were the principal funds from which,
during the latter times of the Roman republic, the poorer citizens

dred and twenty-eight millions of our present money, might in
this manner be reduced all at once to a debt of £5,333,333:6:8.

derived their subsistence. To deliver themselves from this subjection to their creditors, the poorer citizens were continually calling

Even the enormous debt of Great Britain might in this manner
soon be paid.

out, either for an entire abolition of debts, or for what they called
new tables; that is, for a law which should entitle them to a com-

By means of such expedients, the coin of, I believe, all nations,
has been gradually reduced more and more below its original value,

plete acquittance, upon paying only a certain proportion of their
accumulated debts. The law which reduced the coin of all de-

and the same nominal sum has been gradually brought to contain
a smaller and a smaller quantity of silver.

nominations to a sixth part of its former value, as it enabled them
to pay their debts with a sixth part of what they really owed, was

Nations have sometimes, for the same purpose, adulterated the
standard of their coin; that is, have mixed a greater quantity of

equivalent to the most advantageous new tables. In order to satisfy the people, the rich and the great were, upon several different

alloy in it. If in the pound weight of our silver coin, for example,
instead of eighteen penny-weight, according to the present stan-

occasions, obliged to consent to laws, both for abolishing debts,
and for introducing new tables; and they probably were induced

dard, there were mixed eight ounces of alloy; a pound sterling, or
twenty shillings of such coin, would be worth little more than six

to consent to this law, partly for the same reason, and partly that,
by liberating the public revenue, they might restore vigour to that

shillings and eightpence of our present money. The quantity of
silver contained in six shillings and eightpence of our present

government, of which they themselves had the principal direction. An operation of this kind would at once reduce a debt of

money, would thus be raised very nearly to the denomination of a
pound sterling. The adulteration of the standard has exactly the

£128,000,000 to £21,333,333:6:8. In the course of the second

same effect with what the French call an augmentation, or a direct

771

The Wealth of Nations
raising of the denomination of the coin.
An augmentation, or a direct raising of the denomination of the

In the end of the reign of Henry VIII., and in the beginning of
that of Edward VI., the English coin was not only raised in its

coin, always is, and from its nature must be, an open and avowed
operation. By means of it, pieces of a smaller weight and bulk are

denomination, but adulterated in its standard. The like frauds were
practised in Scotland during the minority of James VI. They have

called by the same name, which had before been given to pieces of
a greater weight and bulk. The adulteration of the standard, on

occasionally been practised in most other countries.
That the public revenue of Great Britain can never be com-

the contrary, has generally been a concealed operation. By means
of it, pieces are issued from the mint, of the same denomination,

pletely liberated, or even that any considerable progress can ever
be made towards that liberation, while the surplus of that rev-

and, as nearly as could be contrived, of the same weight, bulk, and
appearance, with pieces which had been current before of much

enue, or what is over and above defraying the annual expense of
the peace establishment, is so very small, it seems altogether in

greater value. When king John of France, {See Du Cange Glossary, voce Moneta; the Benedictine Edition.} in order to pay his

vain to expect. That liberation, it is evident, can never be brought
about, without either some very considerable augmentation of the

debts, adulterated his coin, all the officers of his mint were sworn
to secrecy. Both operations are unjust. But a simple augmentation

public revenue, or some equally considerable reduction of the
public expense.

is an injustice of open violence; whereas an adulteration is an injustice of treacherous fraud. This latter operation, therefore, as

A more equal land tax, a more equal tax upon the rent of houses,
and such alterations in the present system of customs and excise as

soon as it has been discovered, and it could never be concealed
very long, has always excited much greater indignation than the

those which have been mentioned in the foregoing chapter, might,
perhaps, without increasing the burden of the greater part of the

former. The coin, after any considerable augmentation, has very
seldom been brought back to its former weight; but after the great-

people, but only distributing the weight of it more equally upon
the whole, produce a considerable augmentation of revenue. The

est adulterations, it has almost always been brought back to its
former fineness. It has scarce ever happened, that the fury and

most sanguine projector, however, could scarce flatter himself, that
any augmentation of this kind would be such as could give any

indignation of the people could otherwise be appeased.

reasonable hopes, either of liberating the public revenue altogether,

772

Adam Smith
or even of making such progress towards that liberation in time of
peace, as either to prevent or to compensate the further accumula-

might be likely to affect the happiness and prosperity of the
differrent provinces comprehended within it. Such a speculation,

tion of the public debt in the next war.
By extending the British system of taxation to all the different

can, at worst, be regarded but as a new Utopia, less amusing, certainly, but no more useless and chimerical than the old one.

provinces of the empire, inhabited by people either of British or
European extraction, a much greater augmentation of revenue

The land-tax, the stamp duties, and the different duties of customs and excise, constitute the four principal branches of the British

might be expected. This, however, could scarce, perhaps, be done,
consistently with the principles of the British constitution, with-

taxes.
Ireland is certainly as able, and our American and West India

out admitting into the British parliament, or, if you will, into the
states-general of the British empire, a fair and equal representa-

plantations more able, to pay a land tax, than Great Britain. Where
the landlord is subject neither to tythe nor poor’s rate, he must cer-

tion of all those different provinces; that of each province bearing
the same proportion to the produce of its taxes, as the representa-

tainly be more able to pay such a tax, than where he is subject to
both those other burdens. The tythe, where there is no modus, and

tion of Great Britain might bear to the produce of the taxes levied
upon Great Britain. The private interest of many powerful indi-

where it is levied in kind, diminishes more what would otherwise be
the rent of the landlord, than a land tax which really amounted to

viduals, the confirmed prejudices of great bodies of people, seem,
indeed, at present, to oppose to so great a change, such obstacles

five shillings in the pound. Such a tythe will be found, in most
cases, to amount to more than a fourth part of the real rent of the

as it may be very difficult, perhaps altogether impossible, to surmount. Without, however, pretending to determine whether such

land, or of what remains after replacing completely the capital of
the farmer, together with his reasonable profit. If all moduses and

a union be practicable or impracticable, it may not, perhaps, be
improper, in a speculative work of this kind, to consider how far

all impropriations were taken away, the complete church tythe of
Great Britain and Ireland could not well be estimated at less than six

the British system of taxation might be applicable to all the different provinces of the empire; what revenue might be expected from

or seven millions. If there was no tythe either in Great Britain or
Ireland, the landlords could afford to pay six or seven millions addi-

it, if so applied; and in what manner a general union of this kind

tional land tax, without being more burdened than a very great part

773

The Wealth of Nations
of them are at present. America pays no tythe, and could, therefore,
very well afford to pay a land tax. The lands in America and the

produce of America, as those south of that cape are to some parts
of that produce at present. The trade between all the different

West Indies, indeed, are, in general, not tenanted nor leased out to
farmers. They could not, therefore, be assessed according to any

parts of the British empire would, in consequence of this uniformity in the custom-house laws, be as free as the coasting trade of

rent roll. But neither were the lands of Great Britain, in the 4th of
William and Mary, assessed according to any rent roll, but accord-

Great Britain is at present. The British empire would thus afford,
within itself, an immense internal market for every part of the

ing to a very loose and inaccurate estimation. The lands in America
might be assessed either in the same manner, or according to an

produce of all its different provinces. So great an extension of
market would soon compensate, both to Ireland and the planta-

equitable valuation, in consequence of an accurate survey, like that
which was lately made in the Milanese, and in the dominions of

tions, all that they could suffer from the increase of the duties of
customs.

Austria, Prussia, and Sardinia.
Stamp duties, it is evident, might be levied without any varia-

The excise is the only part of the British system of taxation,
which would require to be varied in any respect, according as it

tion, in all countries where the forms of law process, and the deeds
by which property, both real and personal, is transferred, are the

was applied to the different provinces of the empire. It might be
applied to Ireland without any variation; the produce and con-

same, or nearly the same.
The extension of the custom-house laws of Great Britain to Ire-

sumption of that kingdom being exactly of tho same nature with
those of Great Britain. In its application to America and the West

land and the plantations, provided it was accompanied, as in justice it ought to be, with an extension of the freedom of trade,

Indies, of which the produce and consumption are so very different from those of Great Britain, some modification might be nec-

would be in the highest degree advantageous to both. All the invidious restraints which at present oppress the trade of Ireland,

essary, in the same manner as in its application to the cyder and
beer counties of England.

the distinction between the enumerated and non-enumerated commodities of America, would be entirely at an end. The countries

A fermented liquor, for example, which is called beer, but which,
as it is made of molasses, bears very little resemblance to our beer,

north of Cape Finisterre would be as open to every part of the

makes a considerable part of the common drink of the people in

774

Adam Smith
America. This liquor, as it can be kept only for a few days, cannot,
like our beer, be prepared and stored up for sale in great breweries;

sons, in the same manner as several different taxes are levied in
Holland; or, nearly as Sir Matthew Decker proposes, that all taxes

but every private family must brew it for their own use, in the
same manner as they cook their victuals. But to subject every pri-

upon consumable commodities should be levied in England. This
mode of taxation, it has already been observed, when applied to

vate family to the odious visits and examination of the tax-gatherers, in the same manner as we subject the keepers of ale-houses

objects of a speedy consumption, is not a very convenient one. It
might be adopted, however, in cases where no better could be done.

and the brewers for public sale, would be altogether inconsistent
with liberty. If, for the sake of equality, it was thought necessary to

Sugar, rum, and tobacco, are commodities which are nowhere
necessaries of life, which are become objects of almost universal

lay a tax upon this liquor, it might be taxed by taxing the material
of which it is made, either at the place of manufacture, or, if the

consumption, and which are, therefore, extremely proper subjects
of taxation. If a union with the colonies were to take place, those

circumstances of the trade rendered such an excise improper, by
laying a duty upon its importation into the colony in which it was

commodities might be taxed, either before they go out of the hands
of the manufacturer or grower; or, if this mode of taxation did not

to be consumed. Besides the duty of one penny a-gallon imposed
by the British parliament upon the importation of molasses into

suit the circumstances of those persons, they might be deposited
in public warehouses, both at the place of manufacture, and at all

America, there is a provincial tax of this kind upon their importation into Massachusetts Bay, in ships belonging to any other colony,

the different ports of the empire, to which they might afterwards
be transported, to remain there, under the joint custody of the

of eight-pence the hogshead; and another upon their importation
from the northern colonies into South Carolina, of five-pence the

owner and the revenue officer, till such time as they should be
delivered out, either to the consumer, to the merchant-retailer for

gallon. Or, if neither of these methods was found convenient, each
family might compound for its consumption of this liquor, either

home consumption, or to the merchant-exporter; the tax not to
be advanced till such delivery. When delivered out for exporta-

according to the number of persons of which it consisted, in the
same manner as private families compound for the malt tax in

tion, to go duty-free, upon proper security being given, that they
should really be exported out of the empire. These are, perhaps,

England; or according to the different ages and sexes of those per-

the principal commodities, with regard to which the union with

775

The Wealth of Nations
the colonies might require some considerable change in the present
system of British taxation.

for defraying the expense of the respective civil governments. The
expense of the civil and military establishment of Ireland, together

What might be the amount of the revenue which this system of
taxation, extended to all the different provinces of the empire,

with the interest of the public debt, amounts, at a medium of the
two years which ended March 1775, to something less than seven

might produce, it must, no doubt, be altogether impossible to
ascertain with tolerable exactness. By means of this system, there

hundred and fifty thousand pounds a year. By a very exact account of the revenue of the principal colonies of America and the

is annually levied in Great Britain, upon less than eight millions
of people, more than ten millions of revenue. Ireland contains

West Indies, it amounted, before the commencement of the present
disturbances, to a hundred and forty-one thousand eight hundred

more than two millions of people, and, according to the accounts
laid before the congress, the twelve associated provinces of America

pounds. In this account, however, the revenue of Maryland, of
North Carolina, and of all our late acquisitions, both upon the

contain more than three. Those accounts, however, may have been
exaggerated, in order, perhaps, either to encourage their own

continent, and in the islands, is omitted; which may, perhaps,
make a difference of thirty or forty thousand pounds. For the sake

people, or to intimidate those of this country; and we shall suppose, therefore, that our North American and West Indian colo-

of even numbers, therefore, let us suppose that the revenue necessary for supporting the civil government of Ireland and the plan-

nies, taken together, contain no more than three millions; or that
the whole British empire, in Europe and America, contains no

tations may amount to a million. There would remain, consequently, a revenue of fifteen millions two hundred and fifty thou-

more than thirteen millions of inhabitants. If, upon less than eight
millions of inhabitants, this system of taxation raises a revenue of

sand pounds, to be applied towards defraying the general expense
of the empire, and towards paying the public debt. But if, from

more than ten millions sterling; it ought, upon thirteen millions
of inhabitants, to raise a revenue of more than sixteen millions

the present revenue of Great Britain, a million could, in peaceable
times, be spared towards the payment of that debt, six millions

two hundred and fifty thousand pounds sterling. From this revenue, supposing that this system could produce it, must be de-

two hundred and fifty thousand pounds could very well be spared
from this improved revenue. This great sinking fund, too, might

ducted the revenue usually raised in Ireland and the plantations,

be augmented every year by the interest of the debt which had

776

Adam Smith
been discharged the year before; and might, in this manner, increase so very rapidly, as to be sufficient in a few years to discharge

sumption of the principal commodities subject to the duties of
customs and excise, is very small; and in a thinly inhabited coun-

the whole debt, and thus to restore completely the at-present debilitated and languishing vigour of the empire. In the meantime,

try, the opportunities of smuggling are very great. The consumption of malt liquors among the inferior ranks of people in Scot-

the people might be relieved from some of the most burdensome
taxes; from those which are imposed either upon the necessaries

land is very small; and the excise upon malt, beer, and ale, produces less there than in England, in proportion to the numbers of

of life, or upon the materials of manufacture. The labouring poor
would thus be enabled to live better, to work cheaper, and to send

the people and the rate of the duties, which upon malt is different,
on account of a supposed difference of quality. In these particular

their goods cheaper to market. The cheapness of their goods would
increase the demand for them, and consequently for the labour of

branches of the excise, there is not, I apprehend, much more smuggling in the one country than in the other. The duties upon the

those who produced them. This increase in the demand for labour
would both increase the numbers, and improve the circumstances

distillery, and the greater part of the duties of customs, in proportion to the numbers of people in the respective countries, produce

of the labouring poor. Their consumption would increase, and,
together with it, the revenue arising from all those articles of their

less in Scotland than in England, not only on account of the smaller
consumption of the taxed commodities, but of the much greater

consumption upon which the taxes might be allowed to remain.
The revenue arising from this system of taxation, however, might

facility of smuggling. In Ireland, the inferior ranks of people are
still poorer than in Scotland, and many parts of the country are

not immediately increase in proportion to the number of people
who were subjected to it. Great indulgence would for some time

almost as thinly inhabited. In Ireland, therefore, the consumption
of the taxed commodities might, in proportion to the number of

be due to those provinces of the empire which were thus subjected
to burdens to which they had not before been accustomed; and

the people, be still less than in Scotland, and the facility of smuggling nearly the same. In America and the West Indies, the white

even when the same taxes came to be levied everywhere as exactly
as possible, they would not everywhere produce a revenue propor-

people, even of the lowest rank, are in much better circumstances
than those of the same rank in England; and their consumption of

tioned to the numbers of the people. In a poor country, the con-

all the luxuries in which they usually indulge themselves, is prob-

777

The Wealth of Nations
ably much greater. The blacks, indeed, who make the greater part
of the inhabitants, both of the southern colonies upon the conti-

upon malt, the opportunity of smuggling in the most important
branch of the excise would be almost entirely taken away; and if

nent and of the West India islands, as they are in a state of slavery,
are, no doubt, in a worse condition than the poorest people either

the duties of customs, instead of being imposed upon almost all
the different articles of importation, were confined to a few of the

in Scotland or Ireland. We must not, however, upon that account,
imagine that they are worse fed, or that their consumption of ar-

most general use and consumption, and if the levying of those
duties were subjected to the excise laws, the opportunity of smug-

ticles which might be subjected to moderate duties, is less than
that even of the lower ranks of people in England. In order that

gling, though not so entirely taken away, would be very much
diminished. In consequence of those two apparently very simple

they may work well, it is the interest of their master that they
should be fed well, and kept in good heart, in the same manner as

and easy alterations, the duties of customs and excise might probably produce a revenue as great, in proportion to the consump-

it is his interest that his working cattle should be so. The blacks,
accordingly, have almost everywhere their allowance of rum, and

tion of the most thinly inhabited province, as they do at present,
in proportion to that of the most populous.

of molasses or spruce-beer, in the same manner as the white servants; and this allowance would not probably be withdrawn,

The Americans, it has been said, indeed, have no gold or silver
money, the interior commerce of the country being carried on by

though those articles should be subjected to moderate duties. The
consumption of the taxed commodities, therefore, in proportion

a paper currency; and the gold and silver, which occasionally come
among them, being all sent to Great Britain, in return for the

to the number of inhabitants, would probably be as great in
America and the West Indies as in any part of the British empire.

commodities which they receive from us. But without gold and
silver, it is added, there is no possibility of paying taxes. We al-

The opportunities of smuggling, indeed, would be much greater;
America, in proportion to the extent of the country, being much

ready get all the gold and silver which they have. How is it possible to draw from them what they have not?

more thinly inhabited than either Scotland or Ireland. If the revenue, however, which is at present raised by the different duties

The present scarcity of gold and silver money in America, is not
the effect of the poverty of that country, or of the inability of the

upon malt and malt liquors, were to be levied by a single duty

people there to purchase those metals. In a country where the

778

Adam Smith
wages of labour are so much higher, and the price of provisions so
much lower than in England, the greater part of the people must

as is fully sufficient, and generally more than sufficient, for transacting their domestic business. Some of those governments, that

surely have wherewithal to purchase a greater quantity, if it were
either necessary or convenient for them to do so. The scarcity of

of Pennsylvania, particularly, derive a revenue from lending this
paper money to their subjects, at an interest of so much per cent.

those metals, therefore, must be the effect of choice, and not of
necessity.

Others, like that of Massachusetts Bay, advance, upon extraordinary emergencies, a paper money of this kind for defraying the

It is for transacting either domestic or foreign business, that
gold or silver money is either necessary or convenient.

public expense; and afterwards, when it suits the conveniency of
the colony, redeem it at the depreciated value to which it gradu-

The domestic business of every country, it has been shewn in
the second book of this Inquiry, may, at least in peaceable times,

ally falls. In 1747, {See Hutchinson’s History of Massachusetts
Bay vol. ii. page 436 et seq.} that colony paid in this manner the

be transacted by means of a paper currency, with nearly the same
degree of conveniency as by gold and silver money. It is conve-

greater part of its public debts, with the tenth part of the money
for which its bills had been granted. It suits the conveniency of the

nient for the Americans, who could always employ with profit, in
the improvement of their lands, a greater stock than they can eas-

planters, to save the expense of employing gold and silver money
in their domestic transactions; and it suits the conveniency of the

ily get, to save as much as possible the expense of so costly an
instrument of commerce as gold and silver; and rather to employ

colony governments, to supply them with a medium, which,
though attended with some very considerable disadvantages, en-

that part of their surplus produce which would be necessary for
purchasing those metals, in purchasing the instruments of trade,

ables them to save that expense. The redundancy of paper money
necessarily banishes gold and silver from the domestic transac-

the materials of clothing, several parts of household furniture, and
the iron work necessary for building and extending their settle-

tions of the colonies, for the same reason that it has banished those
metals from the greater part of the domestic transactions in Scot-

ments and plantations; in purchasing not dead stock, but active
and productive stock. The colony governments find it for their

land; and in both countries, it is not the poverty, but the
enterprizing and projecting spirit of the people, their desire of

interest to supply the people with such a quantity of paper money

employing all the stock which they can get, as active and produc-

779

The Wealth of Nations
tive stock, which has occasioned this redundancy of paper money.
In the exterior commerce which the different colonies carry on

ment for the goods which they sell to those colonies in tobacco,
than in gold and silver. They expect to make a profit by the sale of

with Great Britain, gold and silver are more or less employed,
exactly in proportion as they are more or less necessary. Where

the tobacco; they could make none by that of the gold and silver.
Gold and silver, therefore, very seldom appear in the commerce

those metals are not necessary, they seldom appear. Where they
are necessary, they are generally found.

between Great Britain and the tobacco colonies. Maryland and
Virginia have as little occasion for those metals in their foreign, as

In the commerce between Great Britain and the tobacco colonies, the British goods are generally advanced to the colonists at a

in their domestic commerce. They are said, accordingly, to have
less gold and silver money than any other colonies in America.

pretty long credit, and are afterwards paid for in tobacco, rated at
a certain price. It is more convenient for the colonists to pay in

They are reckoned, however, as thriving, and consequently as rich,
as any of their neighbours.

tobacco than in gold and silver. It would be more convenient for
any merchant to pay for the goods which his correspondents had

In the northern colonies, Pennsylvania, New York, New Jersey,
the four governments of New England, etc. the value of their own

sold to him, in some other sort of goods which he might happen
to deal in, than in money. Such a merchant would have no occa-

produce which they export to Great Britain is not equal to that of
the manufactures which they import for their own use, and for

sion to keep any part of his stock by him unemployed, and in
ready money, for answering occasional demands. He could have,

that of some of the other colonies, to which they are the carriers.
A balance, therefore, must be paid to the mother-country in gold

at all times, a larger quantity of goods in his shop or warehouse,
and he could deal to a greater extent. But it seldom happens to be

and silver and this balance they generally find.
In the sugar colonies, the value of the produce annually exported

convenient for all the correspondents of a merchant to receive
payment for the goods which they sell to him, in goods of some

to Great Britain is much greater than that of all the goods imported from thence. If the sugar and rum annually sent to the

other kind which he happens to deal in. The British merchants
who trade to Virginia and Maryland, happen to be a particular set

mother-country were paid for in those colonies, Great Britain
would be obliged to send out, every year, a very large balance in

of correspondents, to whom it is more convenient to receive pay-

money; and the trade to the West Indies would, by a certain spe-

780

Adam Smith
cies of politicians, be considered as extremely disadvantageous.
But it so happens, that many of the principal proprietors of the

The returns from the great island of Jamaica, where there is still
much uncultivated land, have, upon this account, been, in gen-

sugar plantations reside in Great Britain. Their rents are remitted
to them in sugar and rum, the produce of their estates. The sugar

eral, more irregular and uncertain than those from the smaller
islands of Barbadoes, Antigua, and St. Christopher’s, which have,

and rum which the West India merchants purchase in those colonies upon their own account, are not equal in value to the goods

for these many years, been completely cultivated, and have, upon
that account, afforded less field for the speculations of the planter.

which they annually sell there. A balance, therefore, must necessarily be paid to them in gold and silver, and this balance, too, is

The new acquisitions of Grenada, Tobago, St. Vincent’s, and
Dominica, have opened a new field for speculations of this kind;

generally found.
The difficulty and irregularity of payment from the different

and the returns front those islands have of late been as irregular
and uncertain as those from the great island of Jamaica.

colonies to Great Britain, have not been at all in proportion to the
greatness or smallness of the balances which were respectively due

It is not, therefore, the poverty of the colonies which occasions,
in the greater part of them, the present scarcity of gold and silver

from them. Payments have, in general, been more regular from
the northern than from the tobacco colonies, though the former

money. Their great demand for active and productive stock makes
it convenient for them to have as little dead stock as possible, and

have generally paid a pretty large balance in money, while the latter have either paid no balance, or a much smaller one. The diffi-

disposes them, upon that account, to content themselves with a
cheaper, though less commodious instrument of commerce, than

culty of getting payment from our different sugar colonies has
been greater or less in proportion, not so much to the extent of

gold and silver. They are thereby enabled to convert the value of
that gold and silver into the instruments of trade, into the materi-

the balances respectively due from them, as to the quantity of
uncultivated land which they contained; that is, to the greater or

als of clothing, into household furniture, and into the iron work
necessary for building and extending their settlements and plan-

smaller temptation which the planters have been under of overtrading, or of undertaking the settlement and plantation of greater

tations. In those branches of business which cannot be transacted
without gold and silver money, it appears, that they can always

quantities of waste land than suited the extent of their capitals.

find the necessary quantity of those metals; and if they frequently

781

The Wealth of Nations
do not find it, their failure is generally the effect, not of their
necessary poverty, but of their unnecessary and excessive enter-

without exporting a single ounce of gold or silver from America.
It is not contrary to justice, that both Ireland and America should

prise. It is not because they are poor that their payments are irregular and uncertain, but because they are too eager to become

contribute towards the discharge of the public debt of Great Britain. That debt has been contracted in support of the government

excessively rich. Though all that part of the produce of the colony
taxes, which was over and above what was necessary for defraying

established by the Revolution; a government to which the
protestants of Ireland owe, not only the whole authority which

the expense of their own civil and military establishments, were to
be remitted to Great Britain in gold and silver, the colonies have

they at present enjoy in their own country, but every security which
they possess for their liberty, their property, and their religion; a

abundantly wherewithal to purchase the requisite quantity of those
metals. They would in this case be obliged, indeed, to exchange a

government to which several of the colonies of America owe their
present charters, and consequently their present constitution; and

part of their surplus produce, with which they now purchase active and productive stock, for dead stock. In transacting their do-

to which all the colonies of America owe the liberty, security, and
property, which they have ever since enjoyed. That public debt

mestic business, they would be obliged to employ a costly, instead
of a cheap instrument of commerce; and the expense of purchas-

has been contracted in the defence, not of Great Britain alone, but
of all the different provinces of the empire. The immense debt

ing this costly instrument might damp somewhat the vivacity and
ardour of their excessive enterprise in the improvement of land. It

contracted in the late war in particular, and a great part of that
contracted in the war before, were both properly contracted in

might not, however, be necessary to remit any part of the American revenue in gold and silver. It might be remitted in bills drawn

defence of America.
By a union with Great Britain, Ireland would gain, besides the

upon, and accepted by, particular merchants or companies in Great
Britain, to whom a part of the surplus produce of America had

freedom of trade, other advantages much more important, and
which would much more than compensate any increase of taxes

been consigned, who would pay into the treasury the American
revenue in money, after having themselves received the value of it

that might accompany that union. By the union with England,
the middling and inferior ranks of people in Scotland gained a

in goods; and the whole business might frequently be transacted

complete deliverance from the power of an aristocracy, which had

782

Adam Smith
always before oppressed them. By a union with Great Britain, the
greater part of people of all ranks in Ireland would gain an equally

Before the commencement of the present disturbances, the coercive power of the mother-country had always been able to restrain

complete deliverance from a much more oppressive aristocracy;
an aristocracy not founded, like that of Scotland, in the natural

those factions from breaking out into any thing worse than gross
brutality and insult. If that coercive power were entirely taken

and respectable distinctions of birth and fortune, but in the most
odious of all distinctions, those of religious and political preju-

away, they would probably soon break out into open violence and
bloodshed. In all great countries which are united under one uni-

dices; distinctions which, more than any other, animate both the
insolence of the oppressors, and the hatred and indignation of the

form government, the spirit of party commonly prevails less in
the remote provinces than in the centre of the empire. The dis-

oppressed, and which commonly render the inhabitants of the
same country more hostile to one another than those of different

tance of those provinces from the capital, from the principal seat
of the great scramble of faction and ambition, makes them enter

countries ever are. Without a union with Great Britain, the inhabitants of Ireland are not likely, for many ages, to consider them-

less into the views of any of the contending parties, and renders
them more indifferent and impartial spectators of the conduct of

selves as one people.
No oppressive aristocracy has ever prevailed in the colonies. Even

all. The spirit of party prevails less in Scotland than in England. In
the case of a union, it would probably prevail less in Ireland than

they, however, would, in point of happiness and tranquillity, gain
considerably by a union with Great Britain. It would, at least,

in Scotland; and the colonies would probably soon enjoy a degree
of concord and unanimity, at present unknown in any part of the

deliver them from those rancourous and virulent factions which
are inseparable from small democracies, and which have so fre-

British empire. Both Ireland and the colonies, indeed, would be
subjected to heavier taxes than any which they at present pay. In

quently divided the affections of their people, and disturbed the
tranquillity of their governments, in their form so nearly demo-

consequence, however, of a diligent and faithful application of the
public revenue towards the discharge of the national debt, the

cratical. In the case of a total separation from Great Britain, which,
unless prevented by a union of this kind, seems very likely to take

greater part of those taxes might not be of long continuance, and
the public revenue of Great Britain might soon be reduced to what

place, those factions would be ten times more virulent than ever.

was necessary for maintaining a moderate peace-establishment.

783

The Wealth of Nations
The territorial acquisitions of the East India Company, the undoubted right of the Crown, that is, of the state and people of

tend to rival her either in wealth or in power. None of these articles, therefore, seem to admit of any considerable reduction of

Great Britain, might be rendered another source of revenue, more
abundant, perhaps, than all those already mentioned. Those coun-

expense. The expense of the peace-establishment of the colonies
was, before the commencement of the present disturbances, very

tries are represented as more fertile, more extensive, and, in proportion to their extent, much richer and more populous than Great

considerable, and is an expense which may, and, if no revenue can
be drawn from them, ought certainly to be saved altogether. This

Britain. In order to draw a great revenue from them, it would not
probably be necessary to introduce any new system of taxation

constant expense in time of peace, though very great, is insignificant in comparison with what the defence of the colonies has cost

into countries which are already sufficiently, and more than sufficiently, taxed. It might, perhaps, be more proper to lighten than

us in time of war. The last war, which was undertaken altogether
on account of the colonies, cost Great Britain, it has already been

to aggravate the burden of those unfortunate countries, and to
endeavour to draw a revenue from them, not by imposing new

observed, upwards of ninety millions. The Spanish war of 1739
was principally undertaken on their account; in which, and in the

taxes, but by preventing the embezzlement and misapplication of
the greater part of those which they already pay.

French war that was the consequence of it, Great Britain, spent
upwards of forty millions; a great part of which ought justly to be

If it should be found impracticable for Great Britain to draw
any considerable augmentation of revenue from any of the re-

charged to the colonies. In those two wars, the colonies cost Great
Britain much more than double the sum which the national debt

sources above mentioned, the only resource which can remain to
her, is a diminution of her expense. In the mode of collecting and

amounted to before the commencement of the first of them. Had
it not been for those wars, that debt might, and probably would

in that of expending the public revenue, though in both there
may be still room for improvement, Great Britain seems to be at

by this time, have been completely paid; and had it not been for
the colonies, the former of those wars might not, and the latter

least as economical as any of her neighbours. The military establishment which she maintains for her own defence in time of peace,

certainly would not, have been undertaken. It was because the
colonies were supposed to be provinces of the British Empire, that

is more moderate than that of any European state, which can pre-

this expense was laid out upon them. But countries which con-

784

Adam Smith
tribute neither revenue nor military force towards the support of
the empire, cannot be considered as provinces. They may, per-

well as the people; or that they should awake from it themselves,
and endeavour to awaken the people. If the project cannot be

haps, be considered as appendages, as a sort of splendid and shewy
equipage of the empire. But if the empire can no longer support

completed, it ought to be given up. If any of the provinces of the
British empire cannot be made to contribute towards the support

the expense of keeping up this equipage, it ought certainly to lay it
down; and if it cannot raise its revenue in proportion to its ex-

of the whole empire, it is surely time that Great Britain should
free herself from the expense of defending those provinces in time

pense, it ought at least to accommodate its expense to its revenue.
If the colonies, notwithstanding their refusal to submit to British

of war, and of supporting any part of their civil or military establishment in time of peace; and endeavour to accommodate her

taxes, are still to be considered as provinces of the British empire,
their defence, in some future war, may cost Great Britain as great

future views and designs to the real mediocrity of her circumstances.

an expense as it ever has done in any former war. The rulers of
Great Britain have, for more than a century past, amused the people
with the imagination that they possessed a great empire on the
west side of the Atlantic. This empire, however, has hitherto existed in imagination only. It has hitherto been, not an empire, but
the project of an empire; not a gold mine, but the project of a gold
mine; a project which has cost, which continues to cost, and which,
if pursued in the same way as it has been hitherto, is likely to cost,
immense expense, without being likely to bring any profit; for the
effects of the monopoly of the colony trade, it has been shewn, are
to the great body of the people, mere loss instead of profit. It is
surely now time that our rulers should either realize this golden
dream, in which they have been indulging themselves, perhaps, as

785

To return to the Electronic Classics Series, go to
http://www.hn.psu.edu/faculty/jmanis/jimspdf.htm
To return to the Adam Smith page, go to
http://www.hn.psu.edu/faculty/jmanis/adamsmith.htm

